脑室外引流术	External Ventricular Drain
脑室外引流（EVD）是神经外科住院医师要掌握的最基本的技术之一，然而如果操作不遵守原则，即使是经验丰富的临床医生也会面临困难。	The external ventricular drain (EVD) is one of the most basic and essential procedures that the junior resident must master but even the most experienced can face difficulties if the technical principles are not respected.
对于罹患致死性脑积水以及脑室内出血的患者，EVD是一项可以挽救生命的措施。	This technique is lifesaving for patients suffering from life-threatening hydrocephalus and intraventricular hemorrhage.
其他脑实质内监测压力的装置只能用于监测颅内压（ICP），而EVD兼具诊断与治疗的作用。	Whereas other intraparenchymal pressure monitoring devices are limited to measuring the intracranial pressure (ICP), the EVD is both diagnostic and therapeutic.
EVD在引流脑脊液CSF的同时可以减轻因CSF产生过多或吸收不足所导致的颅内压过高。	The EVD drains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and relieves intracranial hypertension related to disorders of CSF overproduction and underabsorption.
然而，与置于脑实质内的颅内压监测装置相比，EVD创伤性更大，发生颅内出血与感染（脑室炎）的风险也更大。	However, compared to intraparenchymal pressure monitoring devices, the EVD is more invasive and associated with a higher risk of intracranial hemorrhage and infection (ventriculitis).
EVD引流管的放置是根据外部解剖标志进行的“盲法操作”。	Insertion of the EVD is a “blind procedure” based on approximate external anatomic landmarks.
由于脑室的解剖常因某些潜在疾病而改变，导管的放置路径则需要根据CT扫描显示的变化进行调整。	Frequently, the ventricular anatomy is distorted by the mass effect of the underlying pathology, so the catheter trajectory must be adjusted based on the ventricular distortion seen on a computed tomography (CT) scan.
如果脑室体积较小，没有立体定向技术的帮助，穿刺常常较为困难。	Small ventricles can be challenging to cannulate without stereotaxy.
经非优势半球额叶（右额叶）置入EVD是常规首选方案，但在特定情况下，也会选择将导管放置在左侧。	Right frontal entry through the nondominant frontal lobe is preferred unless there is a compelling reason to place the catheter on the left side.
比如，如果左额叶存在损伤或疾病，仅剩右额叶完整，EVD的导管则必须放置在左侧。	If the right lobe is the only intact frontal lobe because of left frontal lobe pathology or injury, the EVD should be placed on the left side.
例如，右额角出血铸型选择右侧放置导管则会在短时间内造成导管堵塞，这种情况下只能选择左侧脑室造瘘术。	For example, a “blood-casted” right frontal horn may force you to create a left frontal ventriculostomy because the intraventricular hemorrhage will lead to immediate clogging of the right EVD catheter.
另外，孤立性左侧侧脑室也是选择左侧放置导管的原因之一。	The presence of a trapped left lateral ventricle is another reason to use a left-sided catheter.
对于遭受较大损伤或GCS小于8分的患者，由于ICP为生理性升高，并无脑积水产生，也不需要引流脑脊液，因此这类患者更适合放置脑内ICP监测装置。	Patients suffering from traumatic mass lesions and low Glasgow coma scores (8) are candidates for intraparenchymal ICP monitoring rather than EVD implantation since most of these patients have physiologic ICP pressures, do not develop hydrocephalus, and therefore do not require CSF drainage.
然而，存在一小部分患者会发展成难治性颅内压升高，这时则需要利用EVD引流脑脊液。	However, a minority of them will suffer from or later develop medically intractable raised ICP, which can be treated with CSF drainage through an EVD.
手术解剖	Operative Anatomy
手术过程的关键标志是：中线，鼻根，同侧耳屏，同侧瞳孔以及内眦。	The key landmarks for this procedure are the midline, nasion, ipsilateral tragus, ipsilateral pupil, and medial canthus.
在清楚的情况下冠状缝也是一个很有帮助的标志。	If reliably palpable, the coronal suture can also be very helpful.
引流的穿刺点称为Kocher点，位于鼻根后方10-11cm，中线旁3cm。	The entry point for the drain is called the Kocher’s point, and it is located 10-11cm posterior from the nasion and 3cm lateral from the midline.
该穿刺点位于冠状缝前1cm（沿中瞳线）。	This point is 1cm anterior to the coronal suture along the midpupillary line.
图1左上图标示了大脑表面的冠状缝与矢状缝。	Figure 1: The coronal and sagittal sutures are shown in relation to the cerebral surface anatomy (top, left).
右上图显示了 Monro孔的位置。	The foramen of Monro is shown in relation to the cerebral surface anatomy (top, right).
下图显示冠状切片上Monro孔的位置。	A coronal section shows the foramen of Monro (bottom).
导管尖端朝向内眦，靠近Monro孔，这一点也被认为是颅内空间的零点，	The catheter tip is angled toward the medial canthus to end at this foramen which is considered the ‘zero point’ of the intracranial compartment.
颅内压的测定与此相关。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权)	The intracranial pressure is measured relative to this point (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr)
导管的路径朝向一个点：矢状面上耳屏前1cm，冠状面上指向内眦。	The trajectory of the catheter is toward a point ~ 1cm anterior to the tragus on the sagittal plane and toward the medial canthus on the coronal plane.
一般来说，引流管应当垂直进入颅骨到达Monro孔。	As a rule of thumb, the drain should enter perpendicular to the skull to reach the foramen of Monro.
但运用这些解剖标志的前提是Monro孔位于标准的中线位置，未被潜在的病灶所推移。	These landmarks require that the foramen is located in the standard midline position and not distorted by the underlying pathology.
病人体位	Patient Position
病人取仰卧位，床头抬高约30-45°。	The patient is placed in the supine position with the head of the bed elevated approximately 30-45 degrees.
患者头应摆放在正中的解剖位置，因为轻微的头部旋转也会导致术者标记的定位错误。	The patient’s head is placed in a neutral anatomic position because any head rotation will lead to significant disorientation of the surgeon’s landmarks.
由于操作常在昏睡或麻醉的患者中进行，助手需要扶住患者头部，尽量减小钻孔（开颅）时头部的摆动。	Since this procedure is most often performed on a lethargic or sedated patient, the head should be held in place by an assistant to minimize movement during burr hole placement (craniostomy).
流程	Procedure
夹住头发暴露出Kocher点后，通过鼻梁清楚地勾勒出中线后双次核对。	After clipping the hair to expose Kocher’s point, the midline is clearly delineated based on the bridge of the nose and double-checked.
标记出Kocher点并过该点画出1-2cm的切口。	Kocher’s point is marked and a 1-2cm linear incision is drawn through this point.
图2 内侧蓝点是标准的Kocher点。	Figure 2:  The standard Kocher’s point is identified (medial blue dot).
为了避开矢状窦静脉，笔者通常会在Kocher点的标准位置外1cm进行钻孔（外侧蓝点）。	I usually place the burrhole about 1cm lateral to the standard location of Kocher’s point to further avoid the parasagittal veins (lateral blue dot).
图3 显示Kocher点与冠状缝与中线的关系。	Figure 3: Kocher’s point is shown in relation to the coronal suture and midline.
导管尖应当指向Mnoro孔，假设的颅内空间的“零点”。	The tip of the catheter should be aimed at the foramen of Monro, the hypothetical ‘zero point’ of the intracranial space.
上图显示了导管放置的重要原则，即垂直进入颅骨。	The top inset shows the catheter entering perpendicular to the skull, an important principle in placement of the catheter.
下图显示了Kocher点在冠状缝前1cm，矢状缝外侧3cm。	The bottom inset illustrates Kocher’s point located 1cm anterior to the coronal suture and 3cm lateral to the sagittal suture.
在切口周缘以及操作后期导管在帽状腱膜下的隧道周边对头皮进行局部浸润麻醉。	A local anesthetic is infiltrated into the scalp, not only along the incision, but also along the planned path of the trocar for subgaleal tunneling of the drain catheter later in the procedure.
切开切口并放置好小型自动牵引器后，分离颅盖骨的骨膜。	Once the incision is made and the small self-retaining retractor placed, the periosteum is dissected away from the calvarium.
图4  钻头必须垂直进入颅骨，并与EVD导管路径相同（上图）。	Figure 4: The drill must enter the skull at a perpendicular angle and with the same trajectory as the EVD catheter (top image).
因为钻头的直径较小，颅骨又相对较厚，这个操作细节很有必要并且会决定导管进入大脑的角度与轨迹。	This maneuver is essential since the drill’s small diameter bit, together with the thickness of the skull, will determine the allowable angles or trajectories through which the catheter can enter the brain.
由于开颅的不充分导致的轻微偏移也会造成导管尖端最终轨迹的严重移位（下图）。	Any slight deflection of the catheter because of an inadequate craniostomy leads to serious alterations in the final trajectory of the catheter tip (lower image).
由于这些偏移发生在导管进入大脑之后，术者将无法发现。	Since this deflection occurs after the catheter has entered the brain, the operator will not be cognizant of it.
开颅不充分的定义是：钻孔过小以及颅盖骨内板边缘不规则，导致EVD柔软的导管尖端偏移。	An inadequate craniostomy is defined as a small burr hole with irregular edges at the inner table of the calvarium, leading to deflection of the flexible EVD catheter tip.
因此：	Therefore:
应当使用较大直径的钻头	a drill bit with a larger diameter should be used, and
钻头应当以颅骨的厚度多次进行回抽与前插，保证开颅的内缘充分磨开并且无骨性突起出现造成导管偏移。	the bit should be retracted and advanced multiple times along the thickness of the skull to ensure that the inner edges of the craniostomy are adequately drilled and no bony ledge is present to deflect the catheter.
图5 如果钻头还未穿过硬脑膜，可以用钝针切开硬脑膜。	Figure 5: If the drill has not penetrated the dura, a blunt needle can be used to perform the durotomy.
然后，引流管与探针按照原定的轨迹前进（如上述），深度距头皮约6-6.5cm。	The drain is then passed in the planned trajectory (described above) with its stylet to a depth of 6 to 6.5cm as measured from the level of the scalp.
如果导管前进超过7cm才获得脑脊液，术者应当提高警觉，此时有可能穿刺角度错误或导管尖端进入颞角，大脑纵裂，第三脑室，外侧裂甚至基底池。	Any further advancement of the catheter beyond 7cm in order to obtain CSF should alarm the operator about the erroneous angle or location of the catheter tip into the temporal horn, interhemispheric fissure, third ventricles, Sylvian fissure, and even basal cisterns.
这种情况下，需要移动导管位置，向中间与后方稍微倾斜角度。	Under these circumstances, the catheter should be removed, and often it needs to be angled slightly more medially and posteriorly.
图6 从术者的视野透过大脑观察脑室。	Figure 6: View of the ventricles through the brain from the operator’s perspective.
冠状位上引流管的路径朝向内眦，点在矢状面上耳屏前1cm。	The trajectory of the drain is toward the medial canthus on the coronal plane and a point ~1 cm anterior to the tragus on the sagittal plane.
导管尖端靠近Monro孔。	The tip of the catheter should lie near the foramen of Monro.
导管尖端穿过室管膜后会有“噗”一下的感觉，然后确认到CSF流出。	A ‘pop’ can often be felt as the tip penetrates the ependyma; CSF flow is then confirmed.
移除探针，引流管在脑室内继续前进1cm，使导管尖端到达Monro孔。	The stylet should be removed and the catheter advanced for another 1cm within the ventricle so the tip is at the foramen of Monro.
引流管远端在皮肤下穿行并固定，	The distal part of the drain is tunneled under the skin and secured.
关闭小切口时必须注意不要将引流管缝住。	Care must be taken not to sew in the drain when closing this small incision.
图7 在帽状腱膜下小心地穿行引流管可以降低感染风险。	Figure 7: The drain is carefully tunneled under the galea to decrease the risk of infection.
用无齿镊固定引流管，可以将拔出导管或无意中把导管推向脑室深部的风险降至最低（上面的插图与下面的照片）。	A non-toothed forceps instrument is used to hold the drain in place while this is done to minimize the risk of dislodging the catheter or inadvertently pushing it deeper into the ventricle (top inset and bottom photo).
图8 将引流管多点固定在皮肤上可以减少脱出的风险。	Figure 8: The drain is secured to the skin at multiple points to reduce the risk of pullout.
笔者通常用皮肤钉将导管固定在皮肤上。	I use skin staples to secure the catheter to the skin.
有时，CSF并未从导管插入处流出，这是因为脑室内CSF压力过低，并非导管位置不佳。	Occasionally, the lack of CSF return from the catheter upon its insertion is due to low intraventricular CSF pressure, and not an undesirable catheter tip location.
术者不能贸然移开和重新插入导管，	The operator should not prematurely remove and reinsert the catheter.
而应该用1个10cc的注射器从导管缓慢地回抽脑脊液。	Instead, a 10cc syringe should be used to gently withdraw fluid from the catheter.
这一方式也证实EVD导管的位置摆放正确。	This maneuver often confirms the appropriate location of the EVD drain.
如果引流管连续3次未插入脑室，应当停止操作并由更有经验的同事执行或在立体定向引导下进行操作。	If three consecutive passes of the catheter do not cannulate the ventricle, the procedure should be aborted and performed by a more experienced colleague or under stereotactic guidance.
在3次连续尝试之后颅内出血的风险明显增加。	The risk of intracranial hemorrhage increases significantly after three consecutive attempts.
EVD错位	EVD Malpositioning
下面是一个由于开颅口过小导致EVD导管位置错误的例子。	Here is an example of an EVD that has been routed inaccurately most likely due to a small craniostomy.
图9 这个EVD导管可能只是因为小孔的内边缘导致轻微偏移（左上冠状位CT）。	Figure 9: This EVD catheter may have been only slightly deflected by the inner edge of the small burrhole (left upper coronal CT scan).
导管刚刚好偏出侧脑室（右上图）。	The catheter barely missed the lateral ventricle (right upper image).
由于未进入导管，术者将导管插入大于允许的深度，导管尖端位置过深（下列）。	Since the ventricle was not cannulated, the operator advanced the catheter beyond the allowed length, placing the tip of the catheter too deep (lower row).
术后注意事项	Postoperative Considerations
如果笔者多次穿刺或怀疑导管位置错误，术后会立即要求行CT扫描以确定EVD引流管位置摆放正确以及无血肿形成。	If I make multiple passages or suspect catheter malpositioning, I request a CT scan immediately after the procedure to confirm correct placement of the EVD and absence of a hematoma.
对于破裂动脉瘤的患者必须特别小心。	Special consideration must be given for patients with ruptured aneurysms.
如果将EVD压力限定在0或5cm水柱，很可能造成动脉瘤囊壁跨壁压力的迅速变化导致动脉瘤二次破裂。	Opening the EVD to drain at 0 or 5cm H2O may potentially cause an aneurysmal rerupture due to rapid changes in transmural pressure across the wall of the aneurysm sac.
不稳定的破裂动脉瘤引流压力必须不低于10cmH2O。	Unsecured ruptured aneurysms must be drained at no lower than 10cm H2O.
后颅窝存在巨大病灶可以引起显著占位效应或甚至引发小脑幕裂孔疝，这些病人可能由于梗阻性脑积水而需要做脑脊液引流。	Patients with huge posterior fossa masses causing significant mass effect and potential cerebellar transtentorial herniation may require CSF drainage due to obstructive hydrocephalus.
如果幕上脑室系统压力过低，这些病人就可能发生向上的致死性小脑幕裂孔疝（反疝）。	These patients may suffer from life-threatening upward transtentorial herniation if there is no back pressure from the supratentorial ventricular system.
他们脑室引流不应低于15cmH2O。	Their ventricles should not be drained at lower than 15cm H2O.
颅底或脊柱水平存在脑脊液漏的患者不应积极引流，因为这一行为会导致患者颅腔迅速积气以及神经功能下降。	Patients with CSF leakage at the level of the skull base or spine should not be drained aggressively as this maneuver will lead to worsening of their pneumocephalus and neurologic decline.
如果鼻腔与颅内相沟通，感染与脑室沿可能会沿着颅内异物（EVD导管）的表面进行扩散。	Communication with the nasal passages may lead to spread of infection and ventriculitis in the face of a foreign body (EVD) catheter in the ventricle.
而长期使用EVD（2周）将导致感染率以及脑室炎的风险上升。	Long-term EVD usage (2 weeks) leads to increased rates of infection and ventriculitis.
对于活动性脑脊液感染的患者，应尽可能不置入EVD。	Patients with an active CSF infection should not undergo EVD implantation if possible.
点睛之笔	Pearls and Pitfalls
· 如果多次穿刺均未成功，向内向后稍稍倾斜可以提高成功率。	If multiple passes of the catheter are made without success, aiming slightly medially and posteriorly can increase the chance of success.
另外一个方法就是固定引流管再进行CT扫描查看。	Another option is to secure the catheter and obtain a CT scan.
在最后一次定位下纠正导管的路径。	The trajectory can be corrected based on the location of the last pass.
· 如果术者自信引流管在脑室内，但未见CSF回流，用10ml注射器做测压计或轻轻地从脑室内吸出低压力的脑脊液。	If you believe the drain is in the ventricle, but do not observe CSF return, a 10mL syringe can be used as a manometer or to gently withdraw low pressure CSF from the ventricle.
翼点入路开颅术	Pterional Craniotomy
概论	General Considerations
翼点或额颞入路向来在幕上入路中扮演“主力军”角色。	The pterional or frontotemporal craniotomy is the workhorse of the supratentorial approaches.
得益于其简易性、灵活性、高效性和普及性，该入路是处理前、中颅窝病变最常用的手术入路。	Because of its simplicity, flexibility, efficiency, and familiarity to neurosurgeons, this corridor is the most commonly used surgical route to lesions along the anterior and middle skull base.
笔者对常规翼点入路进行如下改良，而形成所谓的扩大翼点入路（extended pterional approach）：	I use the extended pterional approach, defined as a standard pterional craniotomy supplemented and expanded by
沿着蝶骨大翼从外向内切除骨质直至眶上裂；	Osteotomy along the lateral sphenoid wing to the level of the superior orbital fissure
将眶顶骨板磨平；	Drilling along the roof of the orbit to flatten its surface.
根据需要，咬除颞骨鳞部至平中颅底。	If necessary, roungering temporal squama towards the floor of the middle fossa.
上述改良可为鞍旁和额下区域提供无遮挡的手术视野。	These modifications provide unobstructed operative working angles toward the parasellar and subfrontal targets.
通过上述改良，翼点入路已经成为了一种颅底入路。	I consider this extended modification a skull base approach.
新增的蝶骨翼及眶顶骨质的磨除，是对颅底中线区域经额下通路的扩展，减少了对额叶的牵拉。	The additional bone removal at the sphenoid wing and orbital roof expands the subfrontal operative trajectories toward the midline skull base while reducing retraction on the frontal lobe.
眶顶部的打磨可部分起到眶颧开颅的效果，且相比之下，其更具备高效和低容貌损伤的优势。	The osteotomy along the roof of the orbit provides some of the advantages of an orbitozygomatic craniotomy, but it is more efficient and associated with less cosmetic deformity.
扩大翼点入路需根据具体的病变进行灵活的设计和调整。	The extended pterional craniotomy must be tailored to the specific underlying pathology.
下文叙述的是这一入路的通用原则和步骤，具体的调整及硬膜内操作，请参见其他相关章节。	The following steps describe the general principles of this approach, whereas the other relevant chapters review tailored exposures and intradural dissection via this route.
近年来，随着微侵袭锁孔理念的深化，经眉弓切口的眶上入路被用来处理鞍旁和前颅底中线区域病变。	Recently, a supraorbital craniotomy through the eyebrow incision has been used as part of the minimally invasive keyhole concept to parasellar and midline anterior skull base pathologies.
该理念下的另一入路创新即小（mini）翼点入路，通过以外侧裂为中轴的暴露，起到了标准翼点入路相似的效果。	Using the same concept, a minipterional approach has also been described, which is predominantly centered on the main axis of the sylvian fissure and results in a similar exposure to the one afforded via the standard pterional approach.
究竟选择何种入路，最核心的标准，应该是在微创的同时又可提供充足的手术视角和灵活的操作空间，以达到安全且高效处理病变的终极目标。	The ultimate choice of exposure must be minimally disruptive and allow flexible operative working angles to handle the lesion safely and efficiently.
尤为重要的是，必须为潜在的突发险情预留有充足的暴露和操作空间，例如动脉瘤或血管性肿瘤的术中出血。	Most importantly, the exposure should provide appropriate working space to handle potentially catastrophic situations such as massive intraoperative hemorrhage from aneurysms and vascular tumors.
因此，必须避免刻板地、一成不变地使用某一入路。	Therefore, routine indiscriminate use of one approach should be avoided.
术者务必将该入路的各种改良及其优缺点均烂熟于心。	The operator should be intimately familiar with all modifications of the exposures to the subfrontal corridor and their advantages and limitations.
入路适应症	Indications for the Approach
图1：扩大翼点入路可用于显露Willis环及视神经周围的鞍旁病变、前颅底肿瘤（包括眼眶病变），以及脚间窝和侧裂内的病变。	Figure 1: The extended pterional corridor can be used to expose parasellar lesions around the circle of Willis and optic apparatus, anterior skull base tumors (including orbital lesions), and interpeduncular and intrasylvian pathologies.
在笔者的实践中，对于巨大中线部位的前颅窝硬膜内病变（如嗅沟及筛板脑膜瘤），扩大翼点入路已经取代了双额入路。	The extended pterional approach has replaced the bifrontal craniotomy for giant midline anterior cranial fossa intradural lesions (ie olfactory and cribriform plate meningiomas) in my practice.
除去那些起源于硬膜外而向硬膜内侵犯的病变（如嗅神经母细胞瘤、脊索样肉瘤及其他鼻旁窦来源的恶性肿瘤），单侧的眶上外侧入路或翼点入路可在不减少暴露和操作空间的前提下，另具有明显优势。	With the exception of extradural skull base tumors extending into the intradural space (i.e. esthesioneuroblastomas, chondrosarcomas and other sinus malignancies), the unilateral lateral supraorbital or pterional exposure offers numerous advantages and no compromise in the necessary operative working angles.
针对严格筛选的病例，笔者偶尔也会应用翼点入路处理对侧病变，如对侧颈内动脉眼动脉段、大脑中动脉或大脑后动脉P1段动脉瘤。	I occasionally use the pterional route to reach contralateral lesions in very select cases such as contralateral ophthalmic, MCA and P1 artery aneurysms.
对于纯粹的三脑室肿瘤，尤其颅咽管瘤，笔者不采用此入路。	I do not use this route for purely third ventricular tumors, especially craniopharyngiomas.
内镜下经鼻入路可沿三脑室长轴提供绝佳的手术视野，对大多数鞍旁肿瘤亦是如此，同时可避免对脑组织的过度操作。	The endoscopic endonasal route provides excellent working angles along the long axis of the ventricle and most parasellar tumors and facilitates dissection without excessive brain manipulation.
近十年来，所有垂体肿瘤（无论其大小和质地），笔者均是通过内镜下经鼻入路而非开颅来处理的。	For the past decade, through the use of endoscopic endonasal techniques, I have not approached any pituitary tumor (regardless of its size or texture) through the transcranial route.
术前注意事项	Preoperative Considerations
对于术前及术后早期均无癫痫的患者，笔者予以术前预防性抗癫痫药物治疗，至术后7天停药。	I use antiepileptic medications for patients who are not suffering from preoperative seizures, and I terminate these medications 7 days after surgery in the absence of any seizure during the immediate postoperative period.
对于颅底巨大占位广泛累及基底池的特定病例，由于脑脊液循环明显受阻，预计术中松解蛛网膜仍无法有效减少脑压，故常予以腰大池引流释放脑脊液，以利于脑组织的塌陷。	A lumbar drain is placed for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage and facilitation of brain relaxation in select patients who harbor large skull base lesions filling the basal cisterns. Such lesions block CSF pathways along these cisterns and prevent adequate cerebral relaxation during opening of the corresponding arachnoid membranes.
根据肿瘤占位效应的程度，可在开颅前应用甘露醇。	Depending on the degree of mass effect caused by the tumor, mannitol may be administered prior to the craniotomy.
地塞米松有利于缓解血管源性水肿。	Dexamethasone is used in patients with significant vasogenic edema.
对于动静脉畸形或脑膜瘤的介入栓塞，笔者持保守态度。	I use embolization sparingly in patients with an AVMs or meningiomas.
神经导航常规应用。	Neuronavigation is usually used.
脑电监测应用于预计需行载瘤动脉临时阻断的动脉瘤夹闭术中，以评估脑血流骤然变化带来的影响。	Electroencephalography may be used for confirmation of burst suppression during clip ligation of aneurysms that are expected to require temporary parent vessel occlusion.
关于术中血压的控制，动静脉畸形患者的收缩压需较术前降低20-30%，除此以外，均控制在正常范围。	I keep the patient normotensive throughout surgery, except patients with AVMs, for whom the systolic blood pressure is kept ~20-30% below their corresponding preoperative blood pressure.
翼点开颅相关的解剖要点包括颞部头皮软组织解剖层次和关键孔的定位。	Relevant anatomy for performing an adequate pterional craniotomy involves knowledge of the scalp and temporal connective tissue layers and the keyhole site.
正常头皮的五层结构清晰明了，包括皮肤、皮下组织、帽状腱膜、腱膜下疏松结缔组织和骨膜。	Over the scalp, five concentric layers are easily recognized, namely the skin, the subcutaneous tissue, the galea aponeurotica, the loose connective tissue and the pericranium.
颞部的层次则较为复杂。	The temporal region has a much more complex anatomical relationship.
皮肤和皮下组织的深面是颞顶筋膜，其为帽状腱膜在颞部的延续，上述三层在术中通常一起切开而形成皮瓣。	Beneath the skin and subcutaneous tissue, the temporoparietal fascia comprises an extension of the galea over the temporal area. It is commonly included within the skin flap during surgical procedures.
下一层为蜂窝状疏松结缔组织，常利用该层间隙向颧弓分离。	The next layer is the loose connective areolar tissue, which is commonly used to develop the dissection plane towards the zygomatic arch.
向下分离过程中即可到达所谓的下颞部间隔（inferior temporal septum）水平，此处即为三层组织（颞顶筋膜、蜂窝状疏松结缔组织、颞肌筋膜）融合之处。	This plane is followed to the inferior temporal septum where three fascial layers get fused (temporoparietal fascia, loose areolar tissue and temporal fascia).
继续向下，颞肌筋膜则分为两层，即附着于颧弓上缘的浅层和深层，两层之间为颞部浅层脂肪垫。	At that level, the temporal fascia splits into two layers, the deep and superficial laminae that involve the superficial temporal fat pad before adhering to the superior margin of the zygomatic arch.
颞肌筋膜是覆盖于颞肌表面的最后一层，其越过颞上线上方即与骨膜层相延续。	The temporal fascia is the last layer over the temporal muscle and is in continuity with pericranium above superior temporal line.
面神经的额颞支（不同文献的命名不同，又可称为额支或颞支；译者注）即走行于下颞部间隔前方的脂肪-纤维组织内。	The frontotemporal branches of the facial nerve are found in the fatty-fibrous tissue in front of the septum.
因此，帽状腱膜下分离至该间隔时，需进行颞肌筋膜间或筋膜下分离，以保护面神经。	At this stage, preservation of such branches involves performing interfascial or subfascial dissection.
图2：翼点开颅的步骤及手术解剖。	Figure 2: Pterional craniotomy: steps in exposure and operative anatomy.
切口（A）。	Incision (A).
帽状腱膜下分离，分别形成独立的皮瓣和肌辦（B）。	Subgaleal dissection of the myocutaneous layer in two separate layers (B).
筋膜下分离以保护面神经额支（C）。	Subfascial dissection to protect the frontalis branch of the facial nerve (C).
向下牵开颞肌（D）。	Inferior mobilization of the temporalis muscle (D).
沿眶顶磨除骨质以扩展额下的手术视野（E）。	Osteotomy along the roof of the orbit to expand the subfrontal operative trajectory (E).
扩大翼点入路实现的硬膜内暴露（F）（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	Intradural exposure afforded by extended pterional craniotomy (F)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3：面神经额支穿经脂肪垫的走行。	Figure 3: The locations of the frontalis branches of the facial nerve through the fat pad are demonstrated.
无论是采用单独肌皮瓣或是筋膜间或筋膜下分离技术，均需保护该神经以避免术后额肌瘫痪。	These branches should be protected through the use of single layer myocutaneous flaps as well as intefascial and subfascial dissection through the fat pad. These maneuvers avoid postoperative frontalis palsy.
关于筋膜间和筋膜下分离技术保护面神经额支的相关内容，请参见下文“筋膜间及筋膜下技术与脂肪垫的分离”一节。	Please see more informaton below in the additional considerations section regarding the interfascial and subfascial techniques for preservation of the frontalis branch.
关于关键孔的相关内容，请参见《眶颧入路》章节。	For more anatomical information related to the keyhole, please refer to the Orbitozygomatic Craniotomy chapter.
图4：扩大翼点入路的暴露。	Figure 4: Exposure provided through an extended pterional craniotomy.
同侧及跨过视交叉的对侧血管均可显露（G）。	The ipsilateral vasculature and the contralateral vessels across the optic chiasm can be seen (G).
注意到视交叉下方的垂体柄（H）。	Note the pituitary stalk seen inferior to the optic chiasm (H).
牵开视神经可暴露对侧眼动脉的起始部（I）。	The origin of the contralateral ophthalmic artery beneath the retracted optic nerve (I).
去除前床突（J）。	The anterior clinoid process has been removed (J).
颈内动脉动眼神经三角和基底动脉（K）。	The carotid oculomotor triangle and the basilar artery are visible (K).
经视神经颈内动脉三角广泛暴露的基底动脉尖（L）（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	The basilar apex is more widely visible through the opticocarotid triangle (L)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
翼点开颅步骤	PTERIONAL CRANIOTOMY
患者采取平卧位，保持膝关节松弛，床头抬高15-20°。	The patient is placed in the supine position with knees flexed and the head of the table elevated approximately 15-20 degrees.
头架固定，头部向对侧旋转20-45°，颈部适当伸展以利于额叶抬离前颅底，即要求将颧隆突（原文为malar eminence；又称为maxillary process of zygomatic bone，颧骨上颌突；译者注）置于头部最高点。	The head is immobilized in a skull clamp, turned (20-45 degrees) away from the side of the approach, and moderately hyperextended to allow the frontal lobes to fall away from the floor of the anterior cranial fossa. The latter maneuver requires the malar eminence to be the highest point on the head.
越是靠近中线和前方的病变，头部转动的角度越小。	The closer the pathology to the midline and the further anteriorly the lesion is located, the less I turn the head.
例如，对于前交通动脉瘤和大脑中动脉瘤，头部分别旋转约30°和45°。	For example, I turn the head ~30 and ~45 degrees for an anterior communicating artery and middle cerebral artery aneurysm, respectively.
其他学者另有不同的头位摆放依据。	Other colleagues use other parameters to position the head.
越是靠近基底部的病变，如眼动脉段和后交通动脉段动脉瘤以及海绵窦占位，头越是少伸展而多旋转，使得眶外侧嵴（原文为orbital ridge；该术语少有应用，同supraorbital ridge，后者又同superciliary arches或eyebrow ridge，即眉弓；然而此处为眉弓可能性不大，译者认为更可能为眶外侧缘的骨嵴，即额骨颧突-颧骨额突区域；译者注）位于最上方；	More basal pathologies such as ophthalmic and posterior communicating artery aneurysms as well as cavernous sinus masses require little head deflection and greater head rotation so that the orbital ridge is left in the superior plane.
相反地，如大脑中动脉和颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤以及向上侵犯的鞍上肿瘤，头尽量多伸展而少旋转，使得颧隆突位于最上方。	On the other hand, middle cerebral and carotid bifurcation artery aneurysms as well as suprasellar tumors with more superior extension benefit from a greater head deflection and minimal head rotation, allowing the malar prominence to stay in the superior plane.
图5：示意图展示了翼点开颅的手术室标准配备情况。	Figure 5: This illustration depicts the typical operating room setup for a pterional craniotomy.
器械护士可站于患者的一侧，将器械递交给站于（开颅阶段）或坐于（镜下操作阶段）患者另一侧的术者。	The surgical technician who hands the instruments to the surgeon stands on one side of the patient, and the surgeon stands (during the craniotomy) or sits (during microsurgery) across from the technician.
这样使得手术器械的传递更加顺畅。	This configuration allows an easy transfer of surgical instruments to the operator.
麻醉师也可安排在手术床尾，以便为手术团队腾出更多空间。	The anesthesiologist may be placed at the foot of the table if additional room is needed for the operative team.
图6：患者取平卧位，对于颈部活动度有限者，可垫高同侧肩部。	Figure 6: The patient is positioned supine and a shoulder roll is used for patients who have limited neck mobility.
头钉置于切口后方。	The pins are placed well behind the planned incision.
笔者习惯将成对头钉置于对侧颞上线，将单头钉置于同侧乳突。	I prefer to place the dual pins along the contralateral superior temporal line and the single pin on the ipsilateral mastoid bone.
将头部适度旋转和伸展以利于通过重力效应抬开额叶。	The head is slightly turned and extended to allow the frontal lobes to fall away with gravity.
图7：头皮切口始于耳屏前方1cm的颧弓水平。	Figure 7: The incision begins 1 cm anterior to the tragus at the level of the zygoma.
切口起初平行于颞上线向上直行，随后在发际线以内行至中线或对侧瞳中线。	The initial portion of the incision includes a straight line marked perpendicular to the superior temporal line, after which the incision proceeds behind the hairline and extends to the midline or contralateral mid-pupillary line.
颞浅动脉和面神经额支分别位于切口后方和前方。	The superficial temporal artery is posterior and the frontal branch of the facial nerve anterior to the incision.
对于额下径路，无需继续延长发际线内的切口长度（右图）。	Further extension of the incision behind the hairline is not necessary for a subfrontal approach (right image).
下翻皮瓣后暴露关键孔区域是否充分，其预判方法为，将切口两端相连作一直线（图中虚线），关键孔（图中圆圈）距离该直线应在1cm范围之内（右图）。	For reflection of the scalp flap to allow adequate exposure of the keyhole area, a straight line (hashed line) connecting the two ends of the incision should remain within 1cm distance of the keyhole (marked as a circle) (right image).
图8：切口经帽状腱膜直达骨膜层。	Figure 8: The skin is incised through the galea to the level of the pericranium.
Raney夹或双极电凝止血。	Hemostasis is maintained using Raney clips or bipolar electrocautery.
切至颞上线时，将骨膜剥离子置于皮下组织下方，以保护颞浅动脉及颞肌。	When the incision reaches the superior temporal line, a periosteal elevator is introduced under the subcutaneous tissue to protect the superficial temporal artery and the temporalis muscle.
向下，继续用刀片切开头皮（左图）。	The skin is cut with the cutting blade over the periosteal elevator (left image).
探及颞浅动脉后，用剪刀行钝性分离，以暴露额支和顶支。	Once the superficial temporal artery is identified, blunt dissection with scissors is performed until the bifurcation of the frontal and parietal branches is seen.
电凝并离断额支，保留顶支。	The frontal branch needs be coagulated and divided, preserving the parietal branch.
在计划行颅内外血管搭桥时，对颞浅动脉额支或顶支的保护尤为重要（右图）。	Preservation of the frontal or parietal branches is especially important if a bypass is contemplated (right image).
若切口向后扩展而作一更大皮瓣时，则需同时保留颞浅动脉额支以保证有足够的血供促进伤口愈合。	In cases of larger scalp flaps with a more posterior extension of the incision, the frontal branch is preserved to allow optimal vascularization of the flap and enhanced healing.
为减少面神经损伤的风险，切口向下不宜越过颧弓。	To avoid placing the facial nerve at risk, the incision should not extend below the zygoma.
图9：笔者偏向于作单一肌皮瓣，将颞肌连同头皮一起下翻。	Figure 9: I prefer to reflect the scalp flap along with the temporalis muscle in a single myocutaneous layer.
当然也可将皮瓣和肌瓣分开。	Alternatively, the muscle may be dissected in a separate layer.
切开颞肌可使用单极电刀，切开方向一是沿着颞上线，二是沿着头皮切口下部。	The temporalis muscle is incised using monopolar electrocautery in two directions, along the superior temporal line and the inferior aspect of the incision.
随后将颞肌翻向前下方。	The muscle is then reflected anteroinferiorly.
要点是，剥离颞肌时须避免使用单极电刀，以避免颞肌深部的筋膜层（原文为deep temporalis fascia，但需注意此处并非指覆盖颞肌表面的颞深筋膜，而是指位于颞肌深面的真性骨膜层，术语包括subperiosteum、periosteum等；译者注）受损，而导致术后颞肌萎缩，因为支配颞肌的神经及血管即紧贴该筋膜的浅层走行。	It is important to preserve the deep temporalis fascia during this process by avoiding monopolar electrocautery. This fascia contains the neurovascular supply to the muscle. This maneuver may minimize postoperative temporalis muscle atrophy.
将颞肌向下翻开置于颧弓上方，并用鱼钩牵开器固定。	The temporalis muscle is then reflected inferiorly over the zygoma and secured with fishhooks.
需暴露位于关键孔前方的颧骨额突，以实现骨窗向眶顶平面的扩展。	The frontal process of the zygoma just anterior to the keyhole is exposed to allow extension of the craniotomy to the level of the orbital roof.
笔者习惯作一全层肌皮瓣来下翻颞肌，且并不预留肌筋膜带于颞上线处。	I reflect the myocutaneous flap in one layer and do not leave a cuff of muscle behind along the superior temporal line.
需尽可能将肌肉向前下方剥离以显露翼点。	The muscle should be mobilized as anteroinferiorly as possible to reveal the pterion.
为避免术中皮瓣卷曲导致的缺血性损伤，常在鱼钩牵开器固定肌皮瓣后，用一块卷起的纱布垫于其下。	When securing the flap with fish-hook retractors, I place a rolled-up gauze underneath the flap to prevent the kinking of the scalp and its subsequent ischemic damage.
图10：笔者在已暴露的颞上线最后端的下方进行钻孔，随后将硬膜从颅骨内表面剥离。	Figure 10: I place a burr hole just inferior to the most exposed posterior aspect of the superior temporal line and dissect the dura away from the inner aspect of the skull bone.
仅通过该单个骨孔，即可用硬膜剥离子（Penfield3#剥离子）朝向翼点方向，对预计的整个骨窗范围下的硬膜进行剥离。	This single burr hole provides me with enough working space to navigate or “sweep” the dural dissector (#3 Penfield dissector) to mobilize the dura along the entire extent of planned bone flap towards the pterion.
另一种方案是钻两个骨孔，一个位于关键孔，另一个位于颧弓上方。	An alternative option is placement of two burr holes, one along the keyhole and the other above the root of the zygoma.
该方案将造成颞部骨质的缺损，从而引发更多的术后容貌缺损问题。	The latter technique leads to additional bone loss at the temple, potentially causing more postoperative cosmetic deformity.
而上文所述的单骨孔技术，由于将骨孔置于发际线后方的颞肌下，因而减少了上述容貌问题的发生	The single burr hole as illustrated above, will minimize this deformity as the bony defect lies under the muscle behind the hairline.
图11：使用开颅系统，即带底座的B1铣刀进行开颅。	Figure 11: The craniotome or B1 bit with a footplate is then used to create the bone flap.
底座可能会撕裂硬膜，特别是在拐弯处，尤其在额部拐弯时最容易发生。	The footplate of the drill may tear the dura, and is likely to do so as it makes turns, and especially at the turn along the frontal region.
开颅分成两步进行（图中标为步骤1和步骤4）。	There are two osteotomies (marked as steps #1 and #4).
完成步骤1时，在翼点处，笔者将铣刀头旋转180°（步骤2），因为此处有蝶骨大翼外侧端的阻挡而无法继续前行。	After completion of the first bony cut (#1), I turn the drill 180 degrees (step #2) at the pterion where the drill cannot make further progress by reaching the lateral sphenoid wing.
旋转后即可有足够的空间从骨缝内取出铣刀根部（步骤3）。随后可用同样的方式进行步骤4开颅。	This turn creates enough space within the bone for the heel of the drill to be removed (#3) to initiate the second osteotomy following the same technique (#4).
前交通动脉瘤和大脑中动脉瘤的不同开颅范围已在图中分别标出。	The extent of craniotomies for middle cerebral artery and anterior communicating artery aneurysms are outlined.
对于大多数需经额下暴露的前颅底肿瘤，开颅的范围可按前交通动脉瘤来进行。	For most anterior skull base tumors requiring a subfrontal approach, the extent of the craniotomy follows those for the anterior communicating artery aneurysm.
开颅进行到前内侧部时可能会损伤额窦，因此，需仔细评估该区域骨质。	The anteromedial aspect of the craniotomy may violate the frontal sinus, so this bony area should be carefully inspected.
尽管可用眶上切迹来定位额窦外侧部，但这一定位关系并不可靠。	Although the supraorbital notch has been cited as a landmark for defining the lateral aspect of the frontal sinus, this landmark is variable.
术前影像和术中导航有利于明确额窦外侧部的延伸特点。	Preoperative imaging and intraoperative navigation can help identify the lateral extent of the frontal sinus.
若术中开放额窦，则需去除其内黏膜，并用肌肉或骨腊填塞封闭。	If the frontal sinus is exposed, it should be exenterated, its mucosa removed and packed with muscle or bone wax.
图12：去除骨瓣后，使用Penfield1#剥离子将硬膜从眶顶、蝶骨嵴外侧部的额叶面和颞叶面上剥离。	Figure 12: After I elevate the bone flap, I strip the dura away from the roof of the orbit using a Penfield #1 dissector. I also mobilize the dura further away from both the frontal and temporal surfaces of the lateral sphenoid ridge.
图13：将蝶骨嵴的外侧部和中部骨质广泛切除，起初可用咬骨钳以增加效率，随后可用带有侧仞切割头的气动钻。	Figure 13: The lateral and mid sphenoid ridge is aggressively removed, initially using a rongeur to enhance efficiency, then an air drill with a side-cutting burr.
图14：磨平蝶骨嵴后，进一步向内切除蝶骨嵴骨质则可显露眶上裂。	Figure 14: After the sphenoid ridge is drilled flat, additional bone removal along the ridge will expose the superior orbital fissure.
笔者通常也将眶顶壁及眶上的骨窗缘磨平。	I also use the drill to flatten the surface of the orbital roof and the supraorbital edge of the craniotomy.
这些操作，对于实现一个通向前颅底中线区域的无遮拦手术视野，起到至关重要的作用，也正是所谓“扩大”翼点入路的核心所在。	These maneuvers are critical for facilitating an unobstructed subfrontal operative view toward the midline anterior skull base, and define the “extended’ pterional craniotomy.
用缝线沿骨窗缘进行三处硬膜悬吊。	Three dural tack-up sutures are placed around the edges of the craniotomy.
图15：弧形切开硬膜，向前翻开，并可用缝线固定于肌皮瓣上。	Figure 15: The dura is incised in a curvilinear fashion, reflected anteriorly, and may be secured to the myocutaneous flap with sutures.
需注意的是，牵拉硬膜的缝线需尽可能地靠近脑组织，以利于最大程度地将硬膜和肌肉牵开，以远离额下径路的操作区域。	Please note that the dural retraction sutures are placed as close to the brain as possible to mobilize the dura and muscle away from the working zone of the subfrontal route.
图16：硬膜内操作完成后，将硬膜缝合。	Figure 16: After the intradural phase of the operation is complete, the dura is approximated primarily.
对于幕上开颅，除非怀疑术后存在脑积水、脑脊液压力增高的情况，笔者并不强调“水密”缝合硬膜。	I do not persist on a "watertight" dural closure for supratentorial craniotomies unless the ventricle is entered or a risk of hydrocephalus/increased CSF pressures is suspected after surgery.
图17：还纳骨瓣，使用至少三组微型颅骨连接板固定。	Figure 17:  The bone flap is reattached using at least three fixation mini plates.
将起始钻孔点置于发际线后方，可保留关键孔区域骨质，从而减少术后容貌缺损问题的发生。	Placement of the initial burr hole behind the hairline preserves bone around the key hole and minimizes the risk of cosmetic deformity.
在骨窗中央加缝一针悬吊也值得推荐。	A central tack up stitch is optional.
图18：将颞肌筋膜重新缝合至颞上线处预留的筋膜带上。	Figure 18: The temporalis fascia is reattached to its fascial cuff at the superior temporal line.
对于行单层肌皮瓣者，仅需缝合后部肌肉筋膜。	In the case of a single layer myocutaneous flap, the fascia is reattached posteriorly only.
肌肉无需缝合，仅需对筋膜行较松弛的缝合对位，这样可减少术后咀嚼时的不适感。	The muscle is not included in this closure and only the fascia is gently approximated in order to minimize postoperative discomfort during jaw movements.
除非存在头皮止血不彻底的情况，常规不放置帽状腱膜下引流。	I do not routinely use a subgaleal drain unless scalp hemostasis is problematic.
筋膜间及筋膜下技术与脂肪垫的分离	Dissection of the Fat Pad via the Interfascial and Subfascial Techniques
下面两幅图用来阐述筋膜间及筋膜下技术步骤及脂肪垫的解剖分离，目的是减少额肌瘫痪的发生。	The following two images demonstrate the techniques of interfascial and subfascial dissection of the fat pad to minimize the risk of frontalis palsy.
图19：运用筋膜间技术时，大约在眶上缘上方4cm处（图中虚线），于筋膜间脂肪垫的上界切开颞肌筋膜的浅层。	Figure 19: For the interfascial technique, approximately 4 cm above the lateral orbital rim (interrupted line), I incise through the superficial layer of the temporal fascia at the upper edge of the interfascial fat pad.
这一操作，即可使颞肌筋膜浅层连同其浅面的面神经分支一起被翻开，同时翻开的还有附近包含有骨膜层的额部皮瓣（右上图）。	This maneuver mobilizes the superficial layer of temporal fascia with the facial nerve branches on its outer surface and the adjacent frontal pericranium with the scalp flap (right upper image).
需注意在颞上线处切勿行垂直方向切开，以避免损伤跨越此处的面神经（右中图）。	Note the safe incision to avoid transecting the branches of the frontalis nerve (right middle image).
面神经所在的层面位于颞肌筋膜浅层以浅（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	The facial nerve branches are on the outer surface of the superficial layer of the temporalis fascia (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图20：运用筋膜下技术时，将颞肌筋膜深层从颞肌表面掀起，使其与额部骨膜层保持延续性而一起翻开。	Figure 20:  The subfascial technique elevates the deep surface of the temporal fascia from the outer surface of the temporalis muscle in continuity with the frontal pericranium.
该皮瓣内包含有颞浅筋膜（即颞顶筋膜，为帽状腱膜的延续；译者注）、颞深筋膜（即颞肌筋膜；译者注）和筋膜间脂肪垫（位于颞深筋膜浅层和深层之间，译者注）（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	The superficial temporalis fascia, fat pad and deep temporalis fascia are all mobilized along with the scalp flap (right upper and left lower images)(images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
· 笔者对扩大翼点入路的定义，是在标准翼点入路的基础上，进一步沿着蝶骨嵴外侧部和眶顶行骨质的扩大切除，以实现通向鞍旁区域的无遮挡手术视角。	I use the extended pterional approach, defined as a standard pterional craniotomy supplemented and expanded by aggressive osteotomy along the lateral sphenoid wing and roof of the orbit, to provide unobstructed operative working angles toward the parasellar area.
· 眶顶部的打磨可部分起到眶颧开颅的效果，且相比之下，其更具备高效和容貌损伤小的优势。	The osteotomy along the roof of the orbit provides some of the advantages of orbitozygomatic craniotomy while being more efficient and associated with less cosmetic deformity.
· 将翼点入路应用于上岩斜区的纤维型脑膜瘤以及其他大型斜坡肿瘤是不合适的。	The use of a pterional craniotomy for fibrous superior petroclival meningiomas and other large clival tumors is not advised.
岩骨切除术可为这些肿瘤提供更宽阔、更安全的手术径路。	Petrosal osteotomies provide more expanded and safer approaches to these tumors.
顶部开颅术	Parietal Craniotomy
概论与手术解剖	General Considerations and Operative Anatomy
顶部开颅术主要用于需显露大脑半球中后部的手术，同时尽可能地保护前方的运动皮层和后方的视觉皮层等重要功能区。	Parietal craniotomy is designed to provide an operative exposure of the mid to posterior hemisphere while sparing the highly functional anteriorly located sensorimotor cortices and the posteriorly located visual cortex.
该入路主要用于顶叶内侧中线旁的病变，同时也可以暴露纵裂和纵裂两侧病变。	The approach can be devised to lateral and mesial parietal lobe lesions as well as to interhemispheric median or paramedian lesions.
该入路可以提供包括经皮层入路（主要通过顶上小叶的功能哑区）和脑沟间入路两条路径显露病变。	The variations of this corridor allow access to lesions through the transcortical route (through the more functionally “silent” superior parietal lobule) or the interhemispheric fissure.
顶叶后部的矢状窦旁静脉通常较少，因此从此处经纵裂可抵达深部病变。	The parasagittal veins are often less numerous in the posterior parietal region, therefore providing an opportunity to reach deep lesions through the interhemispheric trajectory.
右侧顶叶或非优势半球顶叶（参见维基百科）与空间和定位能力相关。	The right or nondominant parietal lobe (see Wikipedia) is implicated in spatial awareness and navigation.
右侧顶叶手术存在引起肢体偏瘫的风险，绝大部分的功能影响会逐步恢复，但仍有部分患者可能致残。	Operative interventions that place the entire right lobe at risk are associated with hemibody neglect. This neglect does significantly improve over time, but some residual disability persists.
左侧顶叶或优势半球顶叶（参见维基百科）与语言和计算力相关。	The left or dominant parietal lobe (see Wikipedia) is involved in symbolic functions in language and mathematics.
左侧顶叶手术可能影响计算力、连续读写和符号理解能力。	Damage to the left lobe results in problems with mathematics, long reading, writing, and understanding symbols.
Gerstmann综合症与优势半球顶叶下部病变相关，而Balint综合症（皮层性注视麻痹，包括眼球活动和视觉障碍）则与双侧顶叶病变相关。	Gerstmann's syndrome is associated with lesions in the dominant inferior parietal lobe, whereas Balint's syndrome (simultanagnosia, oculomotor apraxia, optic ataxia) is associated with bilateral lesions.
顶间沟把顶叶后部皮层分成顶上小叶（Brodmann5区、7区）和顶下小叶（Brodmann39区、40区）。	The posterior parietal cortex can be subdivided into the superior parietal lobule (Brodmann areas 5  7) and the inferior parietal lobule (39  40), separated by the intraparietal sulcus.
图1：大脑的侧面观（A）、前面观（B）和后面观（C）。	Figure 1: Lateral (A), anterior (B), and posterior (C) views of the cerebrum.
C图所示顶间沟将顶上小叶和顶下小叶分开。	Note the location of the superior and inferior parietal lobules separated by the intraparietal sulcus (C).
矢状窦旁的桥静脉大小和位置多变，是两侧大脑半球重要的引流静脉。	Parasagittal bridging veins are variable in their size and location and play an important role in draining the paramedian hemispheres.
B图所示当开放硬膜的范围过于接近中线时，需特别注意的沿上矢状窦分布的静脉湖。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	Venous lakes along the superior sagittal sinus can be problematic if the dural opening is extended close to the midline (B)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
根据皮层引流范围和方向，顶叶的静脉分为两部分，上部静脉引流进入上矢状窦，而下部静脉测引流进入下矢状窦和侧裂血管。	Parietal lobe veins are classified according to surface of drainage (medial or lateral group) and to the direction of drainage (ascending group: drain to the superior sagittal sinus or descending group: drain to the inferior sagittal sinus or the sylvian fissure).
顶叶外侧皮层可见，上部静脉包括中央静脉、中央后静脉、顶前和顶后静脉，而侧裂静脉则构成下部静脉。	On the lateral surface of the lobe, the ascending veins are the central, postcentral, anterior and posterior parietal veins, while parietosylvian veins form the descending group.
顶叶内侧皮层可见，旁中央静脉，顶前内侧和顶后内侧静脉构成上部静脉，而胼周静脉后部组成下部静脉。	On the medial surface of the lobe, the ascending veins are the paracentral, anteromedial and posteriomedial parietal veins. Finally, the descending group is formed by the posterior pericallosal veins.
外侧静脉还包括Trolard静脉，也称上吻合静脉，该静脉经侧裂穿越额叶和顶叶汇入上矢状窦。	The lateral group also includes the vein of Trolard, also known as superior anastomotic vein, which crosses the frontal and parietal lobes on its way from the sylvian fissure to the superior sagittal sinus.
Trolard静脉常位于中央后回，但也可位于中央沟或中央前回。	The most common location of the vein of Trolard is the postcentral region, but it can also be found at the central or precentral region.
皮层引流静脉可直接汇入上矢状窦，或者汇入矢状窦旁的硬脑膜静脉或硬膜陷窝，而硬脑膜静脉是顶叶和额叶后部静脉的常见引流通道。	The cortical veins drain directly to the superior sagittal sinus or may join a parasagittal meningeal sinus or lacunae in the dura, which is the drainage channel of meningeal veins commonly located at the parietal and posterior frontal areas.
图2：大脑上面观（左上图）、大脑斜面观（右上图）和后面观（下图）显示顶叶的上升组引流静脉（中央静脉、中央后静脉、顶前静脉和顶后静脉）。Ant：前；Cent.：中央；Mid.：中间；Front.：额；Par.：顶；Post.：后；Sag.：矢状的；Str.：直；Sup.：上；Temp.：颞部的；V.：静脉（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权修改）。	Figure 2: Superior (upper left), oblique (upper right) and posterior views (lower row) of the cerebrum demonstrating the ascending group of veins that drain the parietal lobe (central, postcentral, anterior and posterior parietal veins). Ant.: anterior; Cent.: central; Mid.: middle; Front.: frontal; Par.: parietal; Post.: posterior; Sag.: sagittal; Str.: straight; Sup.: superior; Temp.: temporal; V.: vein. (Modified with permission, courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
适应症	Indications for the Approach
顶部开颅术同时适用于包括顶叶区域的脑实质内或脑外病变，包括转移瘤、胶质瘤及脑膜瘤等肿瘤性病灶，以及动静脉畸形和海绵状血管瘤等脑血管病。	The parietal craniotomy is used for both intra- and extra-axial lesions of the region, including neoplasms such as metastases, gliomas, and meningiomas, and vascular lesions such as arteriovenous malformations and cavernous malformations.
顶部经纵裂入路则适用于位于大脑镰、顶叶内侧以及胼胝体压部的病变。	The parietal interhemispheric corridor is used to approach parafalcine, medial parietal, and splenial lesions.
顶部开颅术最常用于大脑凸面、同侧及对侧的镰旁脑膜瘤，手术可能损伤上矢状窦和相连的引流静脉，应尽力避免引起费用性静脉梗塞，所有瘤周的动静脉解剖分离均需注意轻柔保护。	The parietal craniotomy is most often performed for convexity, falcine, and parafalcine meningiomas. In these cases, the patent superior sagittal sinus and the associated draining veins are at risk and should be spared to avoid disabling venous infarcts. Any dissection around the tumor capsule should protect en passage veins and arteries.
如前文所述，顶叶血管的损伤有造成如空间意识、感觉运动和视觉处理功能障碍，以及损伤附近运动皮层和深部白质束的风险。	As discussed above, vascular injuries in the parietal lobe can cause deficits in spatial awareness, sensorimotor function, and visual processing, and also risk injury to the nearby motor cortex and deep white matter tracts.
顶部开颅也可用于处理侧脑室中线病变的手术。	Parietal craniotomy can also be used to approach paramedian (periatrial) lesions of the atrium of the lateral ventricle.
传统入路通常经顶上小叶皮层造瘘暴露病变，该手术入路有导致本体感觉丧失，以及语言障碍，视觉处理能力下降和空间意识障碍的风险。	The traditional approach to the atrium involves a transcortical route through the superior parietal lobule with a risk of deficits in spatial awareness such as astereognosia and speech or visual processing.
最近研究显示，对有特殊职业和活动需求的患者而言，这些功能缺陷对他们的生活质量影响显著。	Recent studies have suggested that, depending on the patient’s occupation and activities, quality of life may indeed be significantly impacted by such deficits.
为避免这些风险，可通过顶叶后部旁正中入路，或经楔前叶对侧大脑镰入路进行手术。	To avoid these risks, lesions of the atrium can be approached through a paramedian posterior parietal craniotomy and contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine approach through the precuneus.
经此入路暴露侧脑室三角部病变的距离较长，且技术要求更高，但可减少脑白质纤维束破环和减轻脑组织牵拉。	This approach provides a longer and more technically challenging path to the atrium, but involves less white matter tract disruption and brain retraction.
可利用术中唤醒皮层电极刺激或反相手段在顶叶皮层定位颅内出血病灶的感觉运动皮层。	Cortical stimulation mapping under “awake,” “sleep” conditions or phase reversal mapping may be considered for localizing the sensorimotor cortex for intraparenchymal lesions situated along the anterior parietal area.
在顶叶开颅手术的前半程中暴露基底池比较困难，因此在病变较大且占位效应明显的病例中，笔者一般选择术前放置腰大池引流。	Since early access to the basal cisterns is not available during parietal craniotomies, I have a low threshold for placing a lumbar drain, even for large lesions with significant mass effect.
为避免已有中线移位的巨大肿瘤患者出现小脑幕切迹疝的发生，笔者会在开放硬膜的同时开放腰大池引流管释放脑脊液，脑脊液的引流可以有效的释放空间，便于对于水肿脑组织的操作。	To avoid transtentorial herniation in the case of massive lesions with midline shift, I open the drain to remove cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) during dural opening. This CSF drainage significantly assists with brain relaxation and manipulation of edematous brain.
如术前的增强MR中可见有疑似矢状窦旁静脉过于粗大时，磁共振或CT静脉血管成像可帮助定位开颅位置。	If the interhemispheric corridor is considered and large parasagittal veins are suspected on preoperative contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, an MR or CT venogram guides the location of craniotomy.
静脉血管成像还可帮助确认有矢状窦侵犯的脑膜瘤病例中矢状窦的血流情况。	The venogram will also confirm the patency of the superior sagittal sinus in the presence of an infiltrating meningioma.
如果同侧纵裂入路路径上有大量矢状窦旁的引流静脉阻挡手术入路时，可考虑选择通过对侧纵裂经大脑镰的入路暴露镰旁的病变。	If numerous parasagittal veins prohibit the ipsilateral interhemispheric corridor, the contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine route may be considered for parafalcine lesions.
如果肿瘤部分浸润静脉窦腔时，引起空气栓塞的风险较高，书签新功能的诊断可有效降低反流性空气栓塞的发生。	If the tumor partially infiltrates the lumen of the venous sinus and the risk of air embolism is significant, a preoperative cardiac diagnostic workup is necessary to exclude the risk of a paradoxical air embolism.
术中也可通过经食道超声心动图和经胸壁多普勒超声排除可疑的空气栓塞发生。	A transesophageal echocardiogram and transthoracic Doppler may be used and there should be a low threshold of suspicion for air embolism during the procedure.
顶部开颅术	PARIETAL CRANIOTOMY
图3：图示患者取侧俯卧位，上半身稍向前倾（约135°）。	Figure 3: The patient is positioned three-quarters prone on the operating room table.
该体位可有效避免因手术需要使颈部过分屈曲，该技巧也同样适用于仰卧位手术。	This position precludes the need to turn the patient’s head into a nonphysiologic posture, as would be the case if the patient were positioned supine.
此外，侧卧位也可以使脑外的病变更易暴露，因其重力作用也可更好地对纵裂旁的病变进行暴露和操作。	Moreover, the lateral position promotes the extra-axial lesions to remain readily accessible and gravity retraction can be exploited for reaching the interhemispheric fissure.
由于术中倾斜手术床可能存在引起患者体位移位的风险，患者必须稳妥的固定于手术床。	The patient must be firmly secured to the table because tilting the table during surgery can risk patient displacement.
患者头位的旋转和倾斜程度主要取决于患者病变的确切位置与患者中线、冠状缝和人字缝等骨性标记。	The degrees of the patient’s head turn and tilt are dependent on the exact location of the lesion with respect to the midline, coronal, and lambdoid sutures.
对顶叶的镰旁病变，可将病变侧置于下方，使术中在倾斜头位时可以利用重力作用充分暴露，使术者可以以更舒服的姿势完成显微操作。	For parafalcine parietal lesions, the side of the lesion can be placed in the dependent position to use gravity retraction while tilting the head away from the floor to permit a more ergonomic sitting position for the operator during microsurgery.
同样，对于通过对侧镰旁入路暴露侧脑室三角部或周围的结构是，笔者倾向于将患者取3/4侧俯卧位，将非病变侧大脑半球置于上方。	Similarly, when approaching the atrium or periatrial region through the contralateral transfalcine route, I prefer to place the patient in a three-quarters prone position and the normal hemisphere on the dependent side.
利用棉垫保护支撑对侧腋窝，同侧肩部用胶带向前下方轻柔牵拉并固定，使肩部尽量避开术者的操作区域。	An axillary roll supports the contralateral axilla. The ipsilateral shoulder is gently pulled anteriorly and inferiorly and secured with tape to keep it out of the operator’s working zone.
对于大脑凸面病变，患者头部足够的倾斜可以将病变位于术野最高点，方便手术操作。	For convexity lesions, it is advantageous to tilt the patient’s head enough to place the lesion at the highest point in the operative field.
图4：头架固定患者头部。	Figure 4: The patient’s head is secured in a skull clamp.
头架安装注意以下两点：	The application of a skull clamp should satisfy certain principles.
第一，单钉侧与双钉侧的连线必须与患者头部水平面平行，以避免头架固定失败或头部滑脱。	First, a line connecting the single pin with the midpoint between the opposite two pins (swivel rocker arm) must cross the equator of the patient’s head to prevent skull clamp fixation failure and head slippage.
第二，颅钉固定位置因尽量避免靠近头顶。	Second, the pins should not be placed close to the vertex.
这样的固定方式可以利用重力作用使对侧半球回缩，扩大经纵裂操作的手术空间。	This positioning of the head will allow the gravity to retract the dependent hemisphere and facilitate a more expanded corridor through the interhemispheric trajectory.
该头位与下图所示的位置正好相反，为暴露皮层或大脑凸面的病变，病变需置于术野最高点以利于操作。	This head position is in contrast to the position in the next sketch where a cortical or convexity lesion is exposed and the lesion is placed close to the highest point of the operative field.
图5：不同颜色标记不同的手术切口。	Figure 5: Various incision styles have been marked.
红色标记的直线切口通常提供充足的暴露范围，	The linear incision (red) often provides ample exposure.
而蓝色标记的马蹄形切口则适用于较大的凸面脑膜瘤。	The horseshoe incision (blue) is reserved for large convexity meningiomas.
黑色标记的对侧开颅的大体范围。	The paramedian craniotomy is outlined (black).
笔者一般利用神经导航或术前磁共振动脉或静脉显影帮助开颅定位，	I use neuronavigation or preoperative MR venogram/angiograms to position the craniotomy.
这种定位的方式可以尽量术中避开矢状窦旁桥静脉，尤其是对于大脑半球间两旁的病变操作。	This tool assists with localizing and avoiding parasagittal bridging veins, especially for procedures requiring interhemispheric dissection.
图6：对于较大的偏侧的凸面脑膜瘤或胶质瘤，传统的马蹄形切口更为适用。	Figure 6: For large lateral convexity meningiomas and gliomas, a traditional horse shoe incision is reasonable.
头位的旋转角度一般是使病变置于术野的最高点为宜。	The head is rotated until the lesion is placed at the summit of the operative field.
图7：对于纵裂中线旁的病变，笔者一般在导航引导下载上矢状窦上钻骨孔2枚，	Figure 7: For paramedian interhemispheric lesions, I place two burr holes over the superior sagittal sinus as guided by neuronavigation.
多数患者上矢状窦一般位于矢状线右侧，最大的偏移范围一般不超过11mm。	The sinus is typically deviated to the right of the sagittal suture in most patients; the maximum deviation is usually no more than 11 mm.
手术早期明确窦的位置可以有助于确定骨瓣的大小与定位。	Early identification of the sinus helps me plan the size and location of the bone flap.
利用3#剥离子分离颅骨内板和上矢状窦窦壁，如矢状窦窦壁黏连，需钻取3枚骨孔，并需利用骨孔使窦壁与颅骨内板完全充分分离，用3号Penfield专用剥离器，在颅盖内板和上矢状窦外壁之间进行充分解剖游离。	A Penfield #3 dissector is used to generously dissect between the inner table of the calvarium and the wall of the superior sagittal sinus. If the wall of the sinus is adherent, a third burr hole should be placed; all burr holes should be readily in continuity within the epidural space.
经腰大池释放脑脊液可帮助降低静脉窦壁的张力利于其与骨板的分离，因而避免在铣开骨瓣时损伤矢状窦。	Cerebrospinal fluid drainage through the lumbar drain mobilizes the wall of the venous sinus and the dura away from the bone, therefore preventing their injury by the footplate of the drill.
骨瓣铣开时窦壁上方应在最后操作，如出现静脉窦损伤出血时可有充分的时间进行处理和止血。	The last bony cut should be made over the venous sinus. This maneuver allows a timely elevation of the bone flap if bleeding is encountered and an injury to the sinus has occured.
取下骨瓣后，可以用含凝血酶的明胶海绵或止血纱控制静脉窦壁的轻中度出血，在关颅时一般保留放置的止血纱。	Upon elevation of the bone flap, mild to moderate bleeding from the sinus wall may be controlled with thrombin-soaked gelfoam or SURGICEL Fibrillar (Somerville, NJ). The latter is left in place untouched during closure.
更多有关静脉窦损伤处置的细节，请参阅颅脑手术原则相关章节。	Please refer to the chapter on the Repair of Dural Venous Sinus Injury in the Principles of Cranial Surgery Volume for further details regarding managing injuries to the sinus.
图8：对于大脑凸面或脑实质内的病变，利用术中导航的技术，硬脑膜的开放范围因在影像学显示增强病灶外2cm处切开。（左图）。	Figure 8: For convexity or intraparenchymal lesions, the dura is opened circumferentially around the tumor with a 2-cm margin away from the contrast-enhancing region as guided by intraoperative navigation (left image).
当手术需要对暴露纵裂要求较高时，笔者一般会切开以上矢状窦为基底的马蹄形硬脑膜瓣（右图）。	If I plan to reach the interhemispheric space (right image), I open the dura in a curvilinear fashion and create a dural flap based on the superior sagittal sinus.
需重点保护较大的引流静脉，而较小的引流静脉在适当的情况下可予以牺牲。	Care is taken to avoid injuring the large draining veins. Occasionally, a small draining vein may need to be sacrificed.
如有汇入窦内的引流静脉阻挡操作时，需调整硬脑膜开放的区域以避开引流静脉（左图插图）。	If a parasagittal vein is encountered draining into the sinus, the dural opening must be adjusted to protect the vein’s inlet into the sinus (left image, inset).
需特别注意自后向前汇入矢状窦的引流静脉，其引流区域一般较大，在此区域常会遇到跨过中线的较大的上矢状窦或静脉湖，这些结构会影响硬膜在中线位置的开放程度，进而限制对于纵裂深部的暴露。	Note that the bridging veins move in the posterior-to-anterior direction to drain into the sinus and may have multiple tributaries. Paramedian extensions of the superior sagittal sinus or venous lakes are frequently encountered in this region. Their presence may limit opening the dura close to the midline and restrict the interhemispheric exposure.
在此情况下，靠近中线时硬膜切开的方向一般选择平行于中线，而非垂直于中线。	In this situation, the dural incision near the midline may be extended parallel rather than perpendicular to the venous sinus.
由于术前中线旁静脉湖范围的不可预测性，中线旁切开硬脑膜时可能会引起矢状窦侧壁的细微撕裂，可通过良好的缝合技术缝合裂口，而双极电凝则可能因引起硬脑膜的收缩而使裂口扩大。	Because of unpredictable lateral reach of the venous lakes, a small tear along the lateral wall of the sinus can be encountered during the paramedian dural incision.  The tear should be closed using fine sutures.  Bipolar coagulation leads to shrinkage of the dura and expansion of the tear.
图9：为开放大脑镰旁的空间，笔者一般会选择从蛛网膜上游离表面的静脉达到松解，为手术牵拉分离提供便利。	Figure 9: To reach the parafalcine space, I release the veins through their arachnoid adhesions and untether them in preparation for their mobilization.
由于蛛网膜黏连较为紧密，因此操作时需特别耐心。	This maneuver may be tedious because the arachnoid membranes can be thick and highly adherent.
腰大池引流脑脊液可以在早期使大脑半球与大脑镰等中线结构分离，便于操作。（左图）。	CSF lumbar drainage affords early mobilization of the hemisphere away from the midline and falx (left image).
笔者一般会在大脑镰上基底处缝合数针以轻柔牵拉上矢状窦，进一步开放纵裂处的操作空间和视角。（右图）。	I place retraction sutures within the superior falx and gently mobilize and rotate the superior sagittal sinus, thereby expanding the operative corridor and working angles within the interhemispheric space (right image).
图10：此时可以开始进行在纵裂区域的进一步显微解剖，术中操作时需轻柔牵拉窦旁静脉避免张力过大。	Figure 10: The next steps of microdissection within the interhemispheric corridor can now begin. The parasagittal veins should not be placed under significant tension.
图11：为暴露对侧侧脑室三角部旁内侧的结构，笔者一般选择“T”形切开大脑镰（左图），并在大脑镰切缘处缝线固定和牵拉翻折。	Figure 11: To reach the contralateral periatrial region, I create a T-shaped incision within the falx (left image). The falcine flaps are reflected and held in place with retraction sutures.
经过对侧楔前叶开放的骨瓣和沿沟回斜行解剖可以提供进入侧脑室三角部的操作路径（绿色箭头，右图），利用导航可以辨识大脑镰、脑皮质和脑白纸纤维束等重要结构。	A corticotomy through the contralateral precuneus and oblique white matter dissection within the medial contralateral hemisphere allow entry into the atrium (green arrow, right image). Division of the falx, cortex, and white matter are performed using navigation.
关颅	Closure
手术完毕，严密止血后有一些关颅的注意事项术者需重点关注。	Once the pathology is handled, hemostasis is achieved and the surgeon’s attention turns to closure.
如术中开放脑室，因常规留置脑室外引流管以便在术后尽快引流清除侧脑室内的肿瘤碎片或积血。	If the ventricle is entered, a ventricular drainage catheter may be placed to clear debris within the ventricles during the immediate postoperative period.
笔者通常不会常规在幕上开颅手术时水密缝合硬脑膜，同时为降低术后无菌性炎症和细菌感染的发生，一般避免使用异体硬膜植入。	I do not routinely close the dura in a watertight fashion for supratentorial craniotomies. I avoid allograft dural substitutes for their risk of aseptic inflammation or infection.
缝合硬脑膜时需注意避免过度牵拉扭曲或阻止窦旁静脉的正常回流。	Dural closure should not “kink” or compromise flow within the parasagittal veins.
· 术中采取3/4侧俯卧位是顶叶病变手术的合适体位，这样的体位有利于同侧病变的显露，可利用重力作用使大脑半球自然下垂，扩大纵裂旁的手术空间。	The three-quarters prone position is a reasonable option for parietal lesions as it facilitates access to the ipsilateral lesion and allows gravity retraction to expand the interhemispheric operative corridor.
· 在中线旁开颅时要尽量避免损伤上矢状窦，同时高度警惕空气栓塞的发生可能。	Injury to the superior sagittal sinus during a paramedian craniotomy should be prevented at all costs. Keep a low threshold of suspicion for air embolism.
· 损伤矢状窦旁桥静脉可能导致灾难性后果，所以要高度重视对该处静脉的保护。	Parasagittal bridging veins often do not receive the respect they deserve. A venous infraction in this region can be catastrophic.
经颞/颞下入路	Temporal/Subtemporal Craniotomy
总体考虑	General Considerations
经颞开颅术是一种在脑内和脑外病变切除中广泛应用的简单易行的入路。	Temporal craniotomy is a simple approach that has vast applicability to intra-axial and extra-axial pathologies.
颞下入路为显露中颅窝底、上岩斜区和与其相关的脑池提供了宽敞的手术通道。	The subtemporal approach provides a wide operative corridor to the floor of the middle fossa and upper petroclival territories and their associated cisterns.
具体来说，通过岩骨前部切除术，这一通道可到达脑干的前上方。	More specifically, this corridor reaches the anterior upper brainstem through the anterior petrosectomy.
颞叶侧方的新皮层，具体来说，即优势侧颞中回的上后方，具有重要的功能，比如语言。	The lateral neocortical temporal lobe and more specifically the dominant superior and posterior parts of the middle temporal gyri affect important functions such as language.
颞中回前部的具体功能仍不清楚，但可能与辨识距离、对所认识的人的脸部识别以及在阅读中理解单词的意思有关。(见维基百科)	The exact function of the anterior middle temporal gyrus is unknown, but it may be involved in processes such as contemplating distance, recognition of known faces, and accessing word meaning while reading (see Wikipedia).
颞下回参与视觉处理，与复杂物体的特征有关，如球状体。	The inferior temporal gyrus is involved with visual processing, associated with the representation of complex object features, such as global shape.
并且，也可能与脸部感知及数字认知有关。(见维基百科)	It may also process face perception and the recognition of numbers (see Wikipedia).
手术适应症	Indications for the Procedure
经颞开颅术适用于切除颞叶中后部脑实质内的肿瘤和凸面的肿瘤。	Temporal craniotomy is beneficial for resection of mid to posterior intraparenchymal and convexity temporal lobe tumors.
同时，这一入路通过经脑沟入路可提供达到海马内病灶的通道、通过经皮质-经脑室-经脉络膜入路可达到基底池。	This route also affords access to mid hippocampal lesions through the transsulcal approach and reaches lateral thalamic tumors and basal cisterns through the transcortical transventricular transchoroidal pathway.
但是，对侧裂的暴露有限。	The exposure of the Sylvian fissure is limited.
颞下入路灵活多变，可暴露中颅窝底、基底池前方和斜坡的多种硬膜下和硬膜外肿瘤性病变。	A subtemporal craniotomy is more versatile and exposes various neoplastic and tumorous intradural and extradural pathologies of the middle fossa floor, anterior basal cisterns, and upper clivus.
通过这一入路可以暴露诸如中颅窝脑膜瘤、小型听神经瘤、三叉神经鞘瘤、低位的基底动脉顶端/基底动脉上方动脉瘤及上岩斜脑膜瘤(通过岩前入路)。	Middle fossa meningiomas, small acoustic tumors and trigeminal schwannomas, low-lying basilar caput/upper basilar artery aneurysms, and upper petroclival meningiomas (through the anterior petrosal approach) are some examples of lesions readily reached via this route.
除此之外，这一入路可用于修复上半规管的破裂。	In addition, this approach allows repair of the superior semicircular canal dehiscence.
颞下入路可与扩大翼点入路相结合，用以暴露脚间池的复杂血管畸形以及扩展到天幕裂孔和视交叉旁区的多间隔的纤维型脑膜瘤。	The subtemporal approach can be used in combination with the extended pterional route for access to complex vascular abnormalities of the interpeduncular cisterns and fibrous multicompartment menigniomas filling the medial incisural and parachiasmatic space.
对于需要暴露颞下后方的病例，应通过术前核磁共振静脉成像(MRV)判定Labbe静脉和其引流到横窦的位置。	The location of the vein of Labbe and its drainage site into the transverse sinus should be estimated preoperatively based on magnetic resonance (MR) venogram for cases that require posterior subtemporal exposure.
Labbe静脉的走形大致位于：颧弓上界连线上方1cm、外耳道开口后方2-5cm(平均2.9cm)。	This drainage site is about 1cm superior to a line parallel to the superior border of the zygomatic arch and 2 to 5 cm (mean 2.9 cm) posterior to the opening of the external auditory meatus.
应明确与小脑幕缘走形一致的动静脉结构的移位情况。	The displacement of other arterial and venous structures along the medial tentorium should be defined.
术前应计划好是否对扩展到幕上下的肿瘤采取联合入路。	The potential need for a combined approach to tumors with both supratentorial and infratentorial extensions should be planned preoperatively.
如果预计脑组织张力较高，应该在切皮前使用甘露醇(1g/Kg)。	Mannitol (1g/Kg) should be administered during skin incision if a “tight” brain is expected.
如果考虑使用脑皮层刺激用于功能定位，应该备有冷的乳酸钠林格液。	If cortical stimulation for functional mapping is contemplated, cold lactated Ringer’s solution should be available.
对于颞下入路，无论肿瘤的大小，为了在硬膜下或硬膜外抬起颞叶时最大程度减少对颞叶牵拉而造成的损伤， 笔者通常会在绝大部分病人中行腰大池置管引流。	In expectation of a subtemporal approach, I generally place a lumbar drain for most patients, regardless of their tumor size, in order to minimize the risk of temporal lobe retraction injury during intradural or extradural elevation of the lobe.
在抬起颞叶时，尚不能到达基底池放液，因此这种备用的释放脑脊液的方法大有裨益。	Since the basal cisterns are not reached until after elevation of the lobe, alternative routes for early cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage is beneficial.
主刀医生位于手术床的头端，根据主刀医生持器械的习惯，器械护士位于主刀医生左侧或右侧。	The surgeon is positioned at the head of the operating room table with the surgical technician at either the right or left, depending on the handedness of the surgeon.
麻醉师位于手术床的尾端，这样可以为助手和手术显微镜提供必要而足够的工作空间。	The anesthesiologist may be situated at the foot of the table, allowing more working room for the assistant and microscope if necessary.
基于皮肤切口的不同，这一入路可能需要或者不需要处理颞浅动脉。	Depending on the skin incision, the superficial temporal artery may or may not be involved in execution of the approach.
颞浅动脉通常位于耳屏前一横指宽度，在颧弓上大约5cm分为额支和顶支。	The artery typically runs one finger-breadth anterior to the tragus and bifurcates into its frontal and parietal branches approximately 5 cm superior to the zygoma.
面神经颞支位于颧弓前方、两层颞浅筋膜浅部的前方。	The temporal branch of the facial nerve is located more anteriorly over the zygoma and superficial to the two layers of the anterior superficial temporal fascia.
颧弓根部是定位中颅窝底水平的必不可少的标志。	The root of the zygoma is an essential landmark to define the level of the middle fossa floor.
这一标志可用来计划和确定第一个颅骨骨孔的位置和接下来的开颅术。	This landmark should be used for planning the initial burr hole and subsequent craniotomy.
术中必须注意Labbe静脉的保护，它的解剖关系将于以下图片中说明。	Preservation of the vein of Labbe is essential. Its anatomic relationships are illustrated in the following images.
图1. 颅骨骨缝与颞叶和侧裂的关系(上图)。	Figure 1: Relationship of the cranial sutures to the temporal lobe and Sylvian fissure (Top image).
鳞状缝覆盖于侧裂的上方，并且可界定颞叶的上界。	Note the squamosal suture overlying the Sylvian fissure, in addition to delineating the superior limit of the temporal lobe.
从图中可以看出颅骨切除的范围要达到颧弓水平的重要性。	Also, the importance of performing the craniectomy to the level of the zygomatic arch is illustrated in this dissection.
其他图片显示颞叶的皮层划分(图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权)。	Cortical topography of the temporal lobe is illustrated in the other images (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图2： 侧裂和颞后区域的静脉解剖。	Figure 2: Venous anatomy of Sylvian and posterior temporal regions.
Labbe静脉走形多变并最终引流至横窦，术中必须予以保留，特别是采取到达颞后区域的联合入路时。	The vein of Labbe runs a variable course toward the transverse sinus, but must always be preserved, especially during combined approaches to the posterior temporal region.
对这一静脉的准确定位对于避免其损伤和预防术后静脉性梗塞至关重要。	Locating this vessel is critical for preventing its injury and temporal lobe venous infarction.
注意不要将颞中静脉与Labbe静脉相混淆。(图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权)	Middle temporal vein should not be confused with the vein of Labbe (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
经颞/颞下开颅术	TEMPORAL/SUBTEMPORAL CRANIOTOMY
对于颅底深部病变的手术，将头部置于合适的位置至关重要。	Appropriate head position is paramount for surgery on deep skull base lesions.
患者的头部应该正对术者，能达到对病变组织充分的暴露，同时对脑组织最小程度的牵拉，并且可以提供灵活的工作角度。	The patient’s head position should direct the surgeon to the region of interest through a path that allows adequate exposure of the lesion, minimizes brain retraction, and affords flexible working angles.
除此之外，在术中，患者头部的放置应该使术者处于一种符合人体工程学的舒适的体位。	Furthermore, the patient’s head position should enable a comfortable ergonomic body posture for the surgeon during the operation.
图3：如果患者颈部比较灵活，通常采取仰卧位，如果患者颈部较僵硬，偶尔会采用侧卧位。	Figure 3: The patient is frequently placed in the supine position (if the patient’s neck is supple) or rarely in the lateral position, if the neck is relatively rigid.
在同侧肩部下方垫一大的肩垫以减少颈部的扭曲，同时患者的颈部应尽可能的旋转。	The patient’s neck should be rotated as much as possible while utilizing a large shoulder roll underneath the ipsilateral shoulder to minimize neck torsion.
非生理性的颈部旋转可导致颈静脉回流受阻和术后颈部疼痛。	Nonphysiologic neck rotation leads to compromised jugular venous return and postoperative neck pain.
老年和体重较大的患者应该采取侧卧位。	Older and heavy-set patients should be placed in a lateral position.
如果患者有明确的颈椎病病史，必须采取侧卧位。	If the patient has a history of significant cervical spondylosis, this dictates the need for a lateral position.
然后，头部应向地面倾斜20度以利用重力牵拉的作用使颞叶远离中颅窝。	The head is then tilted ~20 degrees toward the floor for gravity retraction to mobilize the temporal lobe away from the middle fossa.
病变的确切位置和大小决定了相应的皮肤切口。	The exact location and size of the lesion will determine the corresponding skin incision.
一般来说，颞上回和颞中回的小病灶常采用直切口，而大的颞下病灶采用马蹄形切口。	In general, smaller lesions that are within the superior or middle temporal gyri are amenable to linear incisions, whereas large subtemporal lesions benefit from a horseshoe-shaped incision.
对于扩展到颞肌前方的病灶，采用小的反问号形切口则更为合适。	For lesions that require access to the anterior temporal pole, a small reverse question mark incision would be appropriate.
图4：在经颞和颞下入路中，不同的皮肤切口方式和头钉放置的位置。	Figure 4: Alternative incision styles and pin placement for temporal and subtemporal craniotomies.
对于超过颧弓水平的切口，应该保留颞浅动脉的主干，用手触摸动脉的搏动可帮助设计皮瓣。	An incision that extends to the level of the zygoma should spare the main trunk of the superficial temporal artery. Manual palpation of the artery guides planning of the scalp flap.
如果可能，笔者更倾向于使用直切口，因为这类切口愈合更快。	I prefer a linear incision when possible since this type of incision heals more readily.
当采用直切口时，从颞肌附着的颞上线水平离断颞肌可最大程度减少对皮瓣的牵拉，并且提供充足的骨质的暴露。	Horizontal disconnection of the temporalis muscle attachments from the superior temporal line through the linear incision often maximizes retraction of the scalp flaps and provides adequate bony exposure.
使用颅钻在紧贴颧弓根部上方钻一骨孔，使用3号Penfield剥离子将硬脑膜从颅骨内板剥离，以备行开颅术。	After placing a generous single burr hole just above he root of the zygoma, I use a #3 Penfield dissector to mobilize the dura away from the inner table of the calvarium in preparation for the craniotomy.
如果计划行到达中颅窝底的硬膜外入路，在行硬膜外颞下分离和岩骨切除术时，应避免较早对硬脑膜的损伤以保护颞叶。	If an extradural approach to the middle fossa is planned, it is essential to avoid early injury to the dura in order to protect the lobe during extradural subtemporal dissection and petrosectomy.
如果硬膜与颅骨内板粘连紧密，笔者通常钻多个骨孔。	If the dura is adherent to the inner skull bone, I place numerous burr holes.
腰大池引流缓慢引流出30-40ml脑脊液(每次10-20ml)以松弛脑组织。	The lumbar drain is used to remove ~30 to 40cc of CSF gradually (in 10–20cc aliquots) to relax the brain.
腰大池引流便于将硬膜从颅骨剥离，同时减少硬膜撕裂的风险。	This drainage facilitates dissection of the dura from the calvarium and reduces the risk of a dural tear.
然后行颅骨切开以完成开颅术。	A craniotome is then used to complete the craniotomy.
图5：第一个骨孔临近乙状窦，直切口(上图)和马蹄形切口(下图)。	Figure 5: Note the location of the initial burr hole near the sigmoid sinus for linear (top) and horseshoe (bottom) incisions.
因术中可能会使用颞下手术通道，因此骨瓣应尽可能靠近中颅窝底。	In the case of a subtemporal operative corridor, the craniotomy should be created as close to the middle fossa floor as possible.
确认是否达到这一目标有一个重要的解剖标志：颧弓根部的上缘与中颅窝底水平平齐。	This task may be accomplished by identifying one important landmark: the upper edge of the root of zygoma marks the level of the middle fossa floor.
有一点值得注意的是，中颅窝底是倾斜的， 中颅窝底由前往后逐渐升高。	It is also important to remember that the floor of the middle fossa is oblique and slopes slightly superiorly from the anterior to posterior direction.
因此，开颅骨瓣的下缘应紧邻颧弓水平的上缘。	Therefore, the inferior edge of the craniotomy should be only slightly above the level of the zygoma.
图6：显示开颅术的范围，*为颧弓根部(上图)。	Figure 6: The craniotomy in relation to the root of zygoma (*) is evident (top).
通常，开颅术的下缘遗留有一悬着的骨条，影响通往中颅窝底的手术路径。	Most often, the inferior edge of the craniotomy leaves a strip of overhanging bone, obscuring a clear operative path toward the middle fossa floor.
可使用Leksell咬骨钳咬除这一骨质，直到骨窗下缘达到中颅窝底水平(下图)。	Subsequently, a Leksell rongeur may be used to remove this overhanging bone until the edge of the craniotomy is at the level of the floor (bottom).
手持式的磨钻可进一步辅助完成这一工作。	A handheld drill further assists with this task.
图7：移除骨窗下缘遗留的骨条可使手术视野直达中颅窝底，这样就最大程度的减少了对颞叶的牵拉。	Figure 7: Removal of the overhanging bone over the inferior craniotomy will allow an unobstructed view of the middle fossa floor, minimizing the need for temporal lobe retraction.
图中标记了颧弓根部的位置(*)。	The location of the root zygoma (*) is marked.
使用骨蜡完全封闭颞骨和乳突气房的边缘以预防术后脑脊液漏的发生(箭头所示)。	The temporal bone and mastoid air cells are thoroughly waxed to prevent development of a postoperative CSF fistula (arrows).
然后悬吊硬膜。	Dural Tack up sutures are placed.
图8：如图所示，剪开硬膜以切除脑实质内病灶。	Figure 8: The dura may now be incised, as illustrated, for resection of intraparenchymal lesions.
有时，可沿中颅窝行硬膜外分离以切除颅底的病变。	Alternatively, an extradural dissection along the middle fossa may be resumed for skull base lesions.
术前预估Labbe静脉的位置非常重要。	Importantly, the location of the vein of Labbe should be estimated preoperatively.
调整硬膜剪开和硬膜外抬起颞叶的位置以保护这一重要的静脉结构。	The dural opening and extradural temporal lobe elevation should be adjusted for protection of this vital venous structure.
可进一步通过腰大池引流脑脊液以进一步松弛脑组织。	Additional CSF may be released through the lumbar drain to further relax the lobe.
对于如何行中颅窝硬膜外分离和磨除岩骨请参考岩骨前部切除术这一章节。	Please refer to the Anterior Pterosectomy chapter for further steps regarding extradural middle fossa dissection and petrosal osteotomy.
因为手术涉及到乳突气房，笔者个人倾向于行硬膜水密缝合，然后使用人工硬膜加固或在水密缝合硬膜前放置人工硬膜。	In the presence of air cells, I prefer a watertight dural closure primarily or secondarily using a piece of dural allograft.
脂肪组织由于其自身具有球形体的特征，因此是用来防止脑脊液漏的最佳材料。	Adipose tissue with its globular texture is one of the best barriers against CSF leakage.
在行颞下颅底暴露时，要求去除受肿瘤累及的骨质和硬膜，可在硬膜剪开的放置一脂肪条用以修补硬膜缺损。	In the case of subtemporal skull base exposures that require removal of the tumor-infiltrated dura and bone, strips of adipose tissue are placed across the dural opening to seal the dural defect.
在放置脂肪前，必须保证已经使用骨蜡将乳突气房严密封闭。	Before placement of the adipose grafts, all air cells must be meticulously waxed.
有时，可从颞肌后部取一旋转带蒂肌肉瓣用以修补骨和硬膜的缺损。	Alternatively, a vascularized muscle flap prepared from the posterior aspect of the temporalis muscle may be rotated to fill the defect within the bone or dura.
这一方法主要用于之前行放疗而需行再次手术的患者。	This latter method is used during repeat operations for patients who have previously undergone radiation treatment.
任何乳突和颞骨气房均需再次严密封闭。	Any additional mastoid and temporal air cell are rewaxed.
最后，回纳骨瓣，按解剖结构逐层缝合头皮。	Finally, the bone flap is replaced and the scalp is closed in anatomic layers.
术后，将患者送往ICU行神经功能和血压监控、以及控制疼痛。	Postoperatively, the patient is admitted to the ICU for neurologic and blood pressure monitoring and pain control.
频繁和仔细的神经功能检查非常重要，颞叶牵拉受损和静脉回流障碍均可引起颞叶血肿的发生，而颞叶血肿会很快引起脑干受压而危及生命。	Frequent and careful neurologic exams are paramount because temporal lobe hematomas can occur due to lobar retraction injury or venous drainage compromise, leading to rapid brainstem compression.
通常，在术后第一或第二天将患者转至普通病房。	The patient is usually transferred to the regular ward on the first or second postoperative day.
如果高度怀疑有脑脊液漏，应持续行腰大池引流。	Lumbar drainage may be continued if there is a high suspicion of CSF leakage.
鉴于术中对颞叶的侵扰，强烈推荐术后预防性使用抗癫痫药物至少一周。	Due to manipulation of the temporal lobe, the use of prophylactic antiepileptic medications for at least one week after surgery is highly recommended.
· 在摆放体位时，将患者的头部向地面倾斜是非常关键的操作步骤，这样可以最大程度利用重力进行牵拉，以获取最合适的颞下暴露。	During positioning, tilting the patient’s head toward the floor is a key maneuver to maximize the use of gravity retraction and obtain appropriate subtemporal exposure.
· 颧弓根部的上缘是定位中颅窝底的很好的标记。	The upper edge of the zygoma is a good landmark for locating the level of the middle fossa floor.
· 将开颅术下缘悬着的骨质去除，对于获取直达中颅窝底的手术路径非常重要。	Removal of the overhanging inferior edge of the craniotomy is important for preparing an obstructed operative trajectory toward the middle fossa floor.
· 应在术前对Labbe静脉的位置和走形进行预判。	The location of the vein of Labbe should be estimated preoperatively.
调整硬膜切开和硬膜外抬起颞叶的位置以保护这一至关重要的静脉结构。	Dural opening and extradural temporal lobe elevation should be adjusted for protection of this vital venous structure.
矢状窦旁开颅术	Parasagittal Craniotomy
概述	General Considerations
矢状窦旁开颅术主要用以暴露大脑半球中线旁及上矢状窦部位的病变。	The parasagittal craniotomy exposes lesions along the paramedian hemispheres and superior sagittal sinus.
这类开颅术不仅可以充分暴露上矢状窦方便操作，且可以通过扩大的骨瓣经中线获取对静脉窦的完全掌控，为手术提供帮助。	This basic cranial exposure provides access to the superior sagittal sinus itself and can be extended across the midline for complete control over the sinus.
由于这一区域手术涉及许多桥静脉，位置相对多变，上方静脉湖的大小各异，这一区域的手术难度较大。	Because of numerous bridging veins and the inconsistent location and size of parasagittal venous lakes, operating in this region can be difficult.
大量失血及致命的静脉空气栓塞的风险巨大，因此适当的预防措施格外重要。	The risks of profuse blood loss and life-threatening venous air embolism are significant and therefore appropriate precautions are necessary.
与通常的认识相反，矢状缝并无法准确定位上矢状窦的位置。	Contrary to common knowledge, the sagittal suture does not define the exact location of the superior sagittal sinus.
事实上，典型的矢状窦定位大约在矢状缝右侧偏移，最大偏移一般不会超过11mm。	If fact, the sinus is typically deviated to the right of the sagittal suture; the maximum deviation is usually no more than 11 mm.
改良的经纵裂矢状窦旁开颅术比较多变，在操作中主要通过开放纵裂旁的空间，以达到暴露中线深部的病变。	The interhemispheric modification of the parasagittal approach is very flexible and practical in reaching midline deep-seated lesions through exploitation of the interhemispheric fissure.
这一入路将专辟一章节为大家介绍 经纵裂入路开颅手术操作技巧（Interhemispheric Craniotomy）。	This route will be discussed in its own dedicated chapter: Interhemispheric Craniotomy.
矢状窦旁入路常用于矢状窦旁脑膜瘤手术，也同样适用于转移癌、胶质瘤、动静脉畸形及海绵状血管畸形的手术。	The parasagittal approach is used most often for parasagittal meningiomas, but it can be adapted for metastases, gliomas, arteriovenous malformations, and cavernous malformations.
该术式主要暴露与上矢状窦及大脑镰关系密切的病变。	It is typically reserved for lesions that are intimately associated with the superior sagittal sinus and the superior falx.
术前准备	Preoperative Considerations
开颅手术中神经导航技术可以帮助笔者们获取更大的操作范围，如术前的增强磁共振影像发现有疑似较大的桥静脉存在，术前行MR或CT的静脉显影检查可以帮助笔者们术前通过对桥静脉的精确定位确定开颅范围。	Neuronavigation guides the extent of the craniotomy. If large bridging veins are suspected on preoperative contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, an MR or CT venogram is indicated to plan the location and extent of the craniotomy based on the exact locations of large veins.
静脉显影同时还可以在脑膜瘤侵犯矢状窦时判断窦内的血液通畅度。	These imaging modalities will also confirm the patency of the superior sagittal sinus in the presence of infiltrating meningiomas.
如窦旁的静脉较多，影响术中暴露同侧的大脑半球中线界面时，可以考虑通过自对侧切开大脑镰获取更大的范围切除大脑镰旁的病变。	If numerous parasagittal veins prohibit exploration of the ipsilateral interhemispheric corridor, the contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine route may be considered for parafalcine lesions.
如肿瘤侵犯突入矢状窦窦腔内，术中引起空气栓塞的风险巨大。	If the tumor has infiltrated the lumen of the sagittal sinus, the risk of air embolism is significant.
如术前发现此类情况，术前心脏的诊断检查尤为很重要，可作为术前排除疑似空气栓塞的风险。	In this situation, preoperative cardiac diagnostic tests should be performed to exclude the risk of a paradoxical air embolism.
术中可采用经食道或经胸廓的多普勒心脏彩照进行检查。	Transesophageal and transthoracic Doppler echocardiography should be used during surgery.
尤其患者处于半坐位的体位时，术者应有对空气栓塞发生前兆的基本判断。	The operator should have a low threshold for suspicion of an air embolism, especially for the patients in the semi-sitting position.
在高风险的病例中，术前做好中心静脉置管及经胸多普勒超声是必要的准备。	In high-risk cases, a central venous catheter and a precordial Doppler are necessary.
由于基底池不容易直接开放释放脑脊液，存在脑水肿的大型肿瘤在打开硬膜时易引起脑膨出。	Since the basal cisterns are not readily accessible, large tumors with associated cerebral edema can lead to cerebral herniation during the dural opening.
这样的张力会导致皮层的损伤，同时可能会致使外科医生使用激进的切除方式暴露肿瘤。	Such tension can lead to cortical injury, and the surgeon may be tempted to use aggressive retraction to expose the tumor.
同时，在开颅时利用腰大池引流可以降低颅骨对硬脑膜的张力，在颅骨钻孔过程中保护静脉窦。	In addition, during the craniotomy, the Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage via a lumbar drain decompresses the dura away from the bone and protects the venous sinuses during drilling.
无论是否是巨大肿瘤，笔者一般使用腰大池引流帮助做到脑组织的松解利于手术。	I use lumbar CSF drainage to facilitate brain relaxation regardless of the large size of the tumor.
对于中线部位的巨大肿瘤，应到在打开硬脑膜时释放脑脊液，此时释放脑脊液可以降低脑组织移位的风险。	For large tumors with midline shift, the CSF is drained while the dura is being opened; this timing of CSF drainage decreases the risk of brain shift.
如患者存在严重的血管源性水肿时，辅助使用甘露醇及类固醇药物可以起到一定效果。	If there is a significant amount of vasogenic edema, mannitol and steroids are useful adjuncts.
对于矢状窦及周围静脉的解剖的了解对于开颅手术的安全性尤为重要。	An understanding of parasagittal venous anatomy is important for safe execution of the craniotomy.
图1. 该图显示上矢状窦、静脉陷窝及主要桥静脉的周围结构：矢状窦旁的桥静脉非常重要，因此术中对其的保护需要格外关注。	Figure 1: Configuration of the superior sagittal sinus, lacunae, and major bridging veins: The parasagittal bridging veins are highly important and their preservation is critical.
偶尔牺牲一两支矢状窦前三分之一的窦旁的小静脉尚可容忍，而中后三分之一的桥静脉对于大脑半球的静脉引流至关重要，这一部位的静脉损伤可能会引起静脉栓塞的严重风险。	Occasional sacrifice of one or two small veins along the anterior sinus may be tolerated. In the middle and posterior thirds of the sinus, the bridging veins are indispensible for drainage of the hemisphere; their sacrifice places the patient at serious risk of venous infarction.
静脉窦的直径自前向后逐渐增大，由于旁正中的静脉湖或静脉陷窝的不可确定性，靠中线打开硬膜时可能会因为静脉窦超过边界导致术中大出血。	The sinus caliber increases from the anterior to the posterior direction. Unpredictable paramedian venous lakes (lacunae) can extend far laterally, beyond the edges of the sinus and bleed profusely during dural opening close to the midline.
左图显示的为自前向后的窦旁静脉的走行，右图显示的去除静脉陷窝后暴露窦旁静脉汇入静脉窦的引流模式。（图片来源：AL Rhoton, Jr）	Note that the parasagittal veins travel from the posterior to anterior direction (left image). The venous lacunae have been removed to show the drainage patterns of the parasagittal veins into the sinus (right image)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
矢状窦旁开颅术	PARASAGITTAL CRANIOTOMY
图2. 上图所示，对于肿瘤侵犯前中三分之一矢状窦的病例，患者采取仰卧位，头位正中。	Figure 2: For tumors affecting the anterior and middle third of the sinus, the patient is positioned supine with the head in the neutral position (top).
术野应将肿瘤置于最高点，然而过度抬高头位可能明显增加空气栓塞的风险。	I prefer the tumor at the highest point in the operative field; however, overzealous elevation of the head can significantly increase the risk of air embolism.
下图所示，对于肿瘤侵犯后三分之一矢状窦的病例，患者取侧卧位，这样可以避免过度抬高头位，同时可利用重力作用避免血液积聚在术区影响手术视野。	For lesions affecting the posterior third of the sinus, I prefer the lateral position (bottom), which precludes the need for significant elevation of the head while allowing gravity to clear the blood from the operative field.
图3. 头部以头架安全固定，颈部稍屈曲，使头位符合人体工学舒适体位的同时为术者提供充分的操作肿瘤空间。	Figure 3: The head is secured in a skull clamp and flexed to make the tumor accessible while providing an ergonomically comfortable position for the surgeon to operate.
对于所有大小的肿瘤，均采取线性切口，上图所示头架固定的位置，下图所示的是部分术者在较大的肿瘤手术中采用的U型切口。	I prefer a linear incision for tumors of all sizes (top images: note the location of the pins for the skull clamp). Some operators prefer a U-shaped incision for larger lesions (bottom images).
采用神经导航及术前MR/CT的静脉显影帮助确定开颅术的最佳定位。	I use neuronavigation and/or preoperative MR or CT venogram to determine the best position for the craniotomy.
这种方式可以帮助确定和在术中保护矢状窦旁的桥静脉，尤其是在术中需要对大脑半球的解剖。	This tool localizes and protects parasagittal bridging veins, especially for procedures requiring interhemispheric dissection.
当需要暴露上矢状窦时，切口需要跨越中线。	If I plan to expose the superior sagittal sinus, the incision crosses the midline.
左下图所示颈部的屈曲在暴露包括中三分之一窦部分的靠后方肿瘤是必要的。	Neck flexion is necessary for more posteriorly located tumors within the middle third of the sinus (left lower image).
右下图所示如肿瘤靠前，则患者头部可取中立位，无需过度屈曲。	If the tumor is more anterior, the patient’s head may be held in a neutral position (right lower image).
图4. 对于矢状窦旁的病变需要完全暴露中线的，一般直接在上矢状窦上方钻2枚骨孔。	Figure 4: For parasagittal lesions that require control of the midline, I place two burr holes directly over the superior sagittal sinus.
静脉窦一般偏向矢状缝右侧，最大偏移范围一般不超过11mm，早期确定窦的位置可以帮助笔者们确定骨瓣的位置和大小。	The sinus is typically deviated to the right of the sagittal suture; the maximum deviation is usually no more than 11 mm. Early identification of the sinus helps me plan the size and location of the final bone flap.
一般选用3#骨膜剥离器分离颅骨内板与上矢状窦，如果窦璧粘连紧密，则需要钻第三个骨孔，每一个骨孔下方需要进行分离处理使硬膜外的空间相连续，腰大池引流脑脊液可以使窦璧活动度增加，进而使硬膜与颅骨内板分离，同时可避免磨钻对静脉窦的损伤。	A Penfield #3 dissector is used to generously dissect between the inner table of calvarium and the wall of the superior sagittal sinus. If the wall of the sinus is adherent, a third burr hole should be placed; all burr holes should be readily in continuity within the epidural space. Cerebrospinal fluid drainage through the lumbar drain mobilizes the wall of the venous sinus and the dura away from the bone, therefore preventing their injury by the footplate of the drill.
图5. 左图所示静脉窦上方的操作应该是铣开颅骨的最后一步；	Figure 5: The last bony cut should be made over the venous sinus (left image).
这样操作可以在打开骨瓣时出血或疑似静脉窦损伤时有更充分的时间处理。	This maneuver allows timely elevation of the bone flap if bleeding is encountered and an injury to the sinus is suspected.
右图所示当病变靠近静脉窦或在大脑半球沟回间，则需要将相应长度的矢状窦完全暴露，箭头所指的是静脉窦的位置。	If the lesion extends to near the sinus or interhemispheric fissure, the corresponding length of the sinus is exposed (right image, arrows point to the location of the venous sinus).
骨瓣打开后，可以利用浸泡凝血酶的明胶海绵或止血纱覆盖于静脉窦壁轻柔压迫止血，后者在关颅时可以贴敷于表面不用取出。	Upon elevation of the bone flap, mild to moderate bleeding from the sinus wall may be controlled with thrombin-soaked gelfoam or SURGICEL Fibrillar (Medline Industries, Somerville, NJ). The latter is left in place untouched during closure.
详细内容可参阅《硬脑膜静脉窦损伤（RepairDural Venous Sinus Injury）》章节，了解关于静脉窦严重损伤的处理方法。	Please refer to the chapter on Repair of Dural Venous Sinus Injury  for details related to managing severe injuries to the sinus.
过分激进地硬脑膜止血应尽量避免，这种操作可能扩大撕裂面积或形成窦璧的漏孔。	Aggressive coagulation of the dura is avoided as this maneuver may increase the tear along or the hole within the sinus wall.
这一步的操作中空气栓塞风险最大，无法解释的低血压、呼气末二氧化碳分压的降低和术区戏剧化的出现无血状态都提示术者需要格外注意空气栓塞的存在。	This step has the highest risk of venous air embolism. Unexplained hypotension, decreased end-tidal Pco2, and a dramatically “dry” operative field should increase the operator’s suspicion of this complication.
图6. 术中所示为暴露纵裂的空间，硬膜的打开采取以静脉窦为基底U型方式切开形成硬膜瓣。	Figure 6: If I plan to reach the interhemispheric space (shown in the illustration), I open the dura in a curvilinear fashion and create a dural flap based on the venous sinus.
轻柔的操作避免损伤任何大的引流静脉，首先在远离上矢状窦的位置打开硬脑膜，这样可以帮助笔者们判断皮层静脉的位置，同时可以确切的定位他们与中线引流静脉的关系。	Care is taken not to injure any large draining vein. Initial opening of the dura away from the superior sagittal sinus allows early identification of the cortical veins and reliable recognition of their midline drainage patterns.
图7. 左图所示，如果矢状窦旁静脉引流入矢状窦，则需要注意在剪开硬脑膜是注意适当调整以保护汇入静脉窦的静脉血管；	Figure 7: If a parasagittal vein is encountered draining into the sinus, the dural opening must be adjusted to protect the vein’s inlet into the sinus (left image, inset).
如果在中线硬膜切开时无意切开上矢状窦边缘时，则中线位置的切缘必须进行严密缝合。	If the edge of the superior sagittal sinus is inadvertently cut during medial dural incision, the most medial part of this incision should be closed using fine sutures.
双极电凝在处理切缘上会适得其反，其可能引起硬膜边缘的收缩、漏口的进一步扩大，导致大量出血。	Bipolar electrocautery will compound the problem as it will shrink the dural edges, expand the tear, and cause profuse bleeding.
右图所示，如果需要切除肿瘤侵犯的硬脑膜，则需对矢状窦旁的静脉特别留意。	If a tumor-infiltrated dura needs to be removed, the parasagittal veins must be respected (right image).
在此区域上矢状窦跨中线的增宽及静脉湖非常常见，这可能导致在硬脑膜在中线位置的切开范围受限，从而限制了对于纵裂的暴露。	Paramedian extensions of the superior sagittal sinus or venous lakes are frequently encountered in this region. They may limit dural opening close to the midline and restrict access to the interhemispheric fissure.
在这种情况下或靠近中线时的操作，硬脑膜的切开更倾向于平行于静脉窦或静脉湖的方向操作，而非垂直于静脉窦方向操作。	In this situation and near the midline, the dural incision may be extended parallel to the venous sinus or lake rather than perpendicular to it.
图8. 为开放大脑镰旁的空间，自蛛网膜附着点将静脉分离，以获得将静脉分离的操作。	Figure 8: To reach the parafalcine space, I release the veins through their arachnoid adhesions and untether them in preparation for their mobilization.
如果其附着的蛛网膜增厚且粘连紧密时，这一步骤的操作可能格外耗时。	This maneuver may be tedious as the arachnoid membranes can be thick and highly adherent.
自腰大池引流脑脊液可以在早期获得大脑半球的活动度，使其与中线及大脑镰的分离，在这一步的操作中提供帮助。	Lumbar drainage of the cerebrospinal fluid affords early mobilization of the hemisphere away from the midline and the falx, facilitating this step.
图9. 该图所示，在紧贴静脉窦的下方，利用丝线穿过大脑镰上方，轻柔的牵拉将上矢状窦向对侧移位，从而扩大手术操作范围及可视角度，以充分暴露大脑半球侧方界面。	Figure 9: I place retraction sutures within the superior falx and just below the venous sinus and gently mobilize and rotate the superior sagittal sinus, thereby expanding the operative corridor and the working angles within the interhemispheric space.
图10. 左图所示，为暴露中线深部的病变，此时开始进行显微镜下的解剖纵裂。	Figure 10: For deep midline lesions, the next steps of microdissection within the interhemispheric corridor can now begin (left image).
手术操作中，需注意矢状窦旁的血管不能处于张力较高的牵拉状态。	The parasagittal veins should not be placed under significant tension.
右图所示，位于皮层的病变已完全暴露，此时才可进行肿瘤切除的步骤。	If a cortical lesion is exposed (right image), the next steps of the tumor removal can begin.
一旦获取病理标本，术中的严密止血在关颅过程中需格外重视。	Once the pathology is handled, hemostasis is achieved and attention turns to closure.
大部分学者倾向于硬脑膜需进行水密缝合，但在幕上病变的手术中硬脑膜的缝合并非必须坚持水密缝合。	A watertight dural closure is preferable, but I usually approximate the dura and do not insist on a watertight closure for supratentorial lesions.
缝合操作时尽量避免缝针距离上矢状窦过近。	Tack-up stiches are not used close to the superior sagittal sinus.
沿静脉窦止血主要可以预防术后出现硬膜外血肿。	Hemostasis along the sinus is cardinal for avoidance of compressive postoperative epidural hematoma formation.
· 矢状窦旁开颅术中需不惜一切代价避免上矢状窦的损伤，术者需对术中可以出现的空气栓塞格外警惕，尤其是患者采取坐位或半坐位时需尤其小心。	Injury to the superior sagittal sinus during a parasagittal craniotomy should be prevented at all costs. The operator should have a low threshold of suspicion for an air embolism, especially if the sitting or semi-sitting position is used.
· 矢状窦旁的桥静脉保护需要得到更多的关注。	Parasagittal bridging veins often do not receive the respect they deserve.
中后三分之一的上矢状窦损伤所致的静脉栓塞，其引发的并发症风险明显增加。	The risk of venous infarct is higher for any injury to the parasagittal veins along the middle and posterior third of the superior sagittal sinus.
经纵裂入路开颅术	Interhemispheric Craniotomy
经前纵裂或后纵裂入路开颅术是利用大脑纵裂的自然间隙，进入到大脑镰旁中线深部和脑室旁部位。	The anterior or posterior interhemispheric craniotomy provides access to deep midline parafalcine and paraventricular spaces through the natural interhemispheric fissure.
通过这个自然间隙操作有诸多优点，比如最大限度的降低了对脑组织的牵拉和侵犯。但缘于此操作通道深在而狭窄，该区域的手术充满了技术挑战。	Although working in this natural plane has numerous benefits, such as a minimal need for brain retraction and transgression, the working corridor can be deep and narrow, making surgery in this region technically challenging.
这个入路居于冠状缝周围（进行前纵裂入路时）或位于中央小叶的后方（进行顶上纵裂入路时），以保护冠状缝后3-4 cm处的躯体感觉运动皮质和众多矢状窦旁优势静脉。	This craniotomy is situated around the coronal suture (when using a frontal interhemispheric route) or behind the central lobule (when using the superior parietal interhemispheric route) to protect the sensorimotor cortices and dominant numerous parasagittal veins, which are typically 3-4 cm posterior to the coronal suture.
如果牺牲大的矢状窦旁桥静脉可能会导致静脉性脑梗死和偏瘫。	Sacrifice of the large parasagittal bridging veins may lead to venous infraction and hemiparesis.
尽量避免使用固定牵开器，可以通过动态牵拉或重力牵引（当病人取侧卧位时）以及早期脑脊液引流（通过腰大池引流或脑室造瘘），增加半球活动度使其离开中线。	Fixed retractors must be avoided through the use of dynamic or gravity induced retraction (with the patient in a lateral position) and early cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage (via lumbar drainage or a ventriculostomy) to mobilize the hemisphere away from the midline.
经纵裂入路的改良可以突破此入路手术角度的传统限制。	Modifications of the interhemispheric route may expand the traditional confinements of the operative corridor through this pathway.
图1：对于向侧方发展的病变来说，对侧经大脑镰“斜线”通道（绿色区域）提供了更加灵活的工作角度。	Figure 1: The contralateral transfalcine “cross-court” corridor (green zone) affords more flexible working angles for lesions that extend laterally.
在显露肿瘤侧方边界时，这种针对经同侧纵裂路径的改良，减少了对同侧大脑半球的牵拉（红色区域）。（Contralateral approach: 对侧入路；Ipsilateral approach: 同侧入路）	This modification of the ipsilateral interhemispheric route reduces retraction on the ipsilateral hemisphere (red zone) while reaching the lateral pole of the tumor.
在这一章节，笔者将重点介绍经纵裂入路及其改良入路的技术要点及改进。	In this chapter, I will highlight nuances of techniques for optimizing the interhemispheric approach and its modifications.
经纵裂入路的适应症	Indications for the Approach
应用经纵裂入路手术的经典病理类型包括镰旁脑膜瘤、半球内侧胶质瘤、大脑前动脉远段动脉瘤、转移瘤、动静脉畸形以及位于第三脑室前部内或附近的肿瘤，比如胶样囊肿，下丘脑错构瘤及颅咽管瘤。	The typical pathologies uncovered through this approach include parafalcine meningiomas, medial hemispheric gliomas, distal anterior cerebral artery aneurysms, metastases, arteriovenous malformations, and tumors in and near the anterior third ventricle such as colloid cysts, hypothalamic hamartomas, and craniopharyngiomas.
对于第三脑室后部占位，开颅以冠状缝为中心，但要进行更靠后的胼胝体切开。	For posterior third ventricular masses, the craniotomy is centered over the coronal suture and a more posterior callosotomy is necessary.
对于主体向上进展的丘脑后部肿瘤和松果体区占位，应用经后经纵裂胼胝体静脉间入路（在大脑内静脉周围进行操作）同样是理想的选择。	Posterior thalamic tumors and pineal region masses with predominantly superior extension are also reasonable candidates for the posterior interhemispheric transcallosal intervenous (working around the internal cerebral veins) route.
在显露胼周动脉瘤时，经纵裂入路需要依据动脉瘤与胼胝体膝部的相对位置进行开颅。	The use of this approach to access a pericallosal aneurysm depends on the location of the aneurysm relative to the genu of the corpus callosum.
位于胼胝体膝部以下的胼周动脉瘤，优先选择低位经纵裂入路，以确保对近端血管的安全操控。	For aneurysms that are below the genu, a low interhemispheric approach is preferred in order to secure proximal vascular control.
经纵裂入路显露病变外侧边界的程度有限，对于主要累及同侧丘脑或尾状核的病变，笔者不建议应用此入路进行手术。	The lateral trajectory of the interhemispheric approach is limited, and I do not advise its use for lesions primarily affecting the ipsilateral thalamus or caudate nucleus.
笔者主张经对侧纵裂入路或同侧经皮层通路处理这些位于侧方的病变。	I prefer the contralateral interhemispheric or ipsilateral transcortical corridors for such laterally located lesions.
对于大型肿瘤比如镰旁脑膜瘤，术中脑脊液引流可以使脑组织松弛，利于肿瘤显露以及在手术初始阶段阻断大脑镰层面的肿瘤供血。	For large tumors such as parafalcine meningiomas, intraoperative CSF drainage facilitates brain relaxation and mobilization of the tumor and its devascularization at the level of the falx early in surgery.
因为在进行纵裂间隙解剖时通常并不进入基底池和脑室，所以选择腰大池引流以达到引流脑脊液的目的。	A lumbar drain is the method of choice for this purpose because the basal cisterns and the ventricles are often not readily accessible during dissection of the interhemispheric fissure.
术前应该在核磁共振影像上仔细评估上矢状窦和相应的桥静脉。必要时，需进一步进行核磁共振静脉成像或CT血管成像检查。	The superior sagittal sinus and corresponding bridging veins should be evaluated on preoperative magnetic resonance images, and if necessary, a magnetic resonance venogram or computed tomography angiogram should be performed.
尽管通常认为将矢状窦前三分之一的静脉结构进行结扎是安全的，但仍会有严重的静脉性脑梗死的风险。	Although the involved venous structures along the anterior third of the sagittal sinus are considered safe for ligation, the risk of significant venous infarcts persists.
因此，必须尽可能减少骚扰和牺牲这些静脉结构。	Therefore, manipulation and sacrifice of these venous structures must be kept to a minimum.
如果窦旁肿瘤上方有大量粗大窦旁引流静脉引流至矢状窦，冒然结扎这些静脉是非常不明智的；在这种情况下，可以选择经对侧纵裂大脑镰入路进行手术。	If there are numerous large parasagittal veins draining into the sagittal sinus overlying the parafalcine tumor, it would be ill-advised to ligate these veins; instead, a contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine approach can be an option.
镰旁脑膜瘤通常情况下不需要结扎上矢状窦，但如果发现肿瘤侵犯了静脉窦，术前一定要拟定合适的预案，以避免或处理气栓问题。	Parafalcine meningiomas typically do not require ligation of the superior sagittal sinus, but if they are found to infiltrate the sinus, appropriate precautions for avoidance and management of air embolism is mandatory preoperatively.
处置患有大肿瘤的病人时，在皮肤切开阶段即可按照1g/kg静脉输注甘露醇。	In patients with large tumors, mannitol 1g/kg is administered during skin incision.
如果留置有腰大池引流，可在开颅显露过程中缓慢释放30-40ml的脑脊液。	If a lumbar drain is available, 30-40 cc of CSF is drained gradually during craniotomy.
充分了解窦旁静脉的解剖对于实施经纵裂入路手术是很重要的。	An understanding of parasagittal venous anatomy is important for execution of this approach.
图2：冠状位非手术图像，显示了经纵裂通路朝向中线深部目标区域的手术轨迹。	Figure 2: A coronal non-operative view of the surgical trajectory for the interhemispheric corridor toward the midline deep surgical targets is demonstrated.
重要的解剖标志包括扣带回（1），胼胝体（2）和穹窿（3）。	Important landmark structures include the cingulum (1), corpus callosum (2) and fornices (3).
每个解剖平面的脑血管结构都必须小心保护。	The cerebrovascular structures in each dissection level should be carefully preserved.
间脑深部静脉尤为重要，以避免手术相关并发症发生。	The diencephalic deep veins are of special importance to avoid surgical morbidity.
图3：冠状缝周围的静脉解剖。	Figure 3: The venous anatomy around the coronal suture.
冠状缝前方的矢状窦旁静脉稀疏。	The parasagittal veins are sparse anterior to the coronal suture.
因此，经纵裂入路开颅大多选择冠状缝前方，以避免重要的窦旁静脉损伤。	Therefore, an interhemispheric craniotomy, mostly anterior to the suture, avoids these important veins.
一根粗大的额叶回流桥静脉恰好位于冠状缝的后方（图片经AL Rhoton, Jr 授权）。	A large bridging vein just posterior to this suture drains the frontal lobes (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4：经纵裂间隙的上面观。	Figure 4: Superior view of the interhemispheric fissure.
右侧额叶被牵向侧方，显露双侧大脑前动脉（A.C.A）远段和胼胝体，与扣带回相比胼胝体呈亮白色（上图）。	The right frontal lobe is retracted laterally to expose the bilateral distal anterior cerebral artery (A.C.A.) branches and the corpus callosum, which is bright white compared with the cingulate cortex (upper images).
双侧扣带回皮质会非常紧密的黏在一起，并可能会被误认为是胼胝体。	The cortices of bilateral cingula can be very adherent to each other and may be mistaken for the corpus callosum.
胼缘动脉可以用作寻找胼周动脉的路标。	The callosomarginal artery may be used as a road map to reach the pericallosal arteries.
注意到这个视野（左下图）没有牺牲任何桥静脉， 这是通过松解周边的蛛网膜而获得的显露。	Notice that this view (left lower image) was achieved without sacrificing any bridging veins, but instead through untethering them from their surrounding arachnoid membranes.
胼胝体切开可以显露脑室（右下图）（图片经AL Rhoton, Jr 授权）。	Callosotomy allows exposure of the ventricle (right lower image)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
经纵裂入路开颅	INTERHEMISPHERIC CRANIOTOMY
图5：病人可以取仰卧或者侧卧位。	Figure 5: The patient may be placed supine or in the lateral position.
仰卧位可以使术者轻松的辨认中线结构的方向（右下图），而侧卧位（左下图）可以通过重力牵引获得术区（同侧）大脑半球移位。	The supine position more readily orients the operator to the midline structures (lower left image), whereas the lateral position (lower right image) allows gravity retraction to mobilize the dependent (ipsilateral) hemisphere.
在胼周动脉瘤病例中，需将病人的头部后仰以获得前交通动脉和胼胝体膝部之间的血管近端管控。	In the case of a pericallosal aneurysm, the patient’s head is extended to achieve proximal control between the anterior communicating artery and the genu of corpus callosum.
在肿瘤的病例中，应该使术野中病变尽可能处于其最高的位置。	In the case of a tumor, the lesion should be positioned as high as possible within the operative field.
图6：对于刚好位于膝部上方的胼周动脉瘤来说轻度旋转颈部的体位是合理的（左图）。	Figure 6: A slightly flexed neck position is reasonable for a pericallosal aneurysm just above the level of the genu (left image).
病变的位置与胼胝体膝部的关系决定了颈部后仰的角度。	The location of the lesion in relation to the genu determines the degree of neck extension.
室间孔的胶样囊肿是可以通过经胼胝体入路（右图）来显露的。	A colloid cyst at the foramen of Monro is accessible through the transcallosal approach (right image).
经胼胝体入路可以观察到脉络丛、大脑内和丘纹静脉的全貌。	The transcallosal route provides a panoramic view of the choroid plexus and internal cerebral and thalamostriate veins.
图7：经前纵裂入路皮肤切口位于发迹内，可以是弧形（蓝色）或马蹄形（绿色）。	Figure 7: For the anterior interhemispheric approach, the skin incision is made in a curvilinear (blue) or horseshoe (green) fashion behind the hairline.
切口线位置取决于病变的确切位置。	The location of the linear incision is determined by the exact location of the lesion.
马蹄形切口跨越中线，三分之一位于冠状缝后方，三分之二位于其前方。	The horseshoe incision is one-third behind and two-thirds anterior to the coronal suture and crosses the midline.
移除上矢状窦上方的骨瓣后，应用大脑镰上的牵引缝线可以将静脉窦的向侧方移动，扩大纵裂通道。	Bone removal over the superior sagittal sinus will allow lateral mobilization of the sinus using retraction sutures in the falx to expand the interhemispheric corridor.
对于大型肿瘤来说U形切口更合适。	For larger tumors, a U-shaped incision is more appropriate.
要注意头架颅骨固定钉的位置。	Notice the location of the pins of the skull clamp.
图8：总体来说，右侧旁正中开颅可以应用在胼周动脉瘤（左图）或脑室内肿瘤（右图）的手术中。	Figure 8: A right paramedian craniotomy is outlined for pericallosal aneurysms (left image) or may be applied for intraventricular tumors (right image).
神经导航对与确定开颅和胼胝体切开的位置很有帮助。	Neuronavigation is helpful in planning the craniotomy and callosotomy.
注意颅骨钻孔的位置要在窦的上方，并且静脉窦要显露足够的宽度，以便打开硬脑膜后可以轻柔的牵转静脉窦。	Note that the burr holes are placed on the venous sinus, and the width of the sinus is partially exposed to allow gentle rotation of the dural sinus after dural opening.
图9：在完成静脉窦上方的两个颅骨钻孔之后，笔者使用3号Penfield剥离子，把硬脑膜从骨瓣的颅骨内板上大致分离开，尤其是静脉窦上方的硬膜。	Figure 9: After I complete two burr holes over the sinus, I use a #3 Penfield dissector to generously separate the dura from the inner table of the calverium underneath the craniotomy and especially over the sinus.
切骨时把静脉窦上方的颅骨切开放到最后一步，这样当发生静脉窦损伤时就可以及时打开骨瓣。	The final bone cut is made along the sinus to allow timely elevation of the flap if injury to the sinus occurs.
要准备好长条的速即纱或明胶海绵，用于覆盖在静脉窦上，起到止血作用。	Large strips of surgicel or gelfoam should be available to cover the sinus for hemostasis.
腰大池的脑脊液引流能够便于将静脉窦和硬脑膜从颅骨内板上分离，以避免发生静脉窦损伤或硬脑膜撕裂的意外情况。	Cerebrospinal fluid drainage through the lumbar drain allows the sinus and dura to fall away from the inner table of the skull and prevents unintentional sinus injury or durotomies.
图10：以矢状窦为基底U形打开硬膜瓣（上图-仰卧位）。	Figure 10: The dura is opened in a U-shaped flap based on the sagittal sinus (top image-supine position).
大脑镰上缘的牵引线将静脉窦向侧方翻转，扩大纵裂间隙。	Retraction sutures in the superior falx rotate the venous sinus laterally and expand the interhemispheric reach.
可以牺牲一些小的桥静脉，但大的桥静脉需要被保留住。	Some small bridging veins may be sacrificed, but the larger ones should be preserved.
注意到，通过重力牵引能够便于术区大脑半球移位，远离中线（下图-侧卧位）。	Note that gravity retraction facilitates mobilization of the dependent hemisphere away from the midline (bottom image-lateral position).
图11：硬膜下部分的解剖是沿着大脑镰进行的。在扣带回层面沿着中线找到同侧胼缘动脉（上图）。	Figure 11: The subdural portion of the dissection is completed along the falx and the ipsilateral callosomarginal artery is traced along the midline to the level of the cingulum (top image).
这个动脉确定了中线解剖的界面，外科医生可沿着该动脉，通过精细的锐性显微外科技术对黏连的扣带回进行解剖，以避免造成扣带回皮质软膜下损伤（下图）。	This artery will define the midline dissection planes so the surgeon can avoid subpial injury to the adherent cortices of the cingula through meticulous and sharp microsurgical techniques (bottom image).
图12：注意扣带回（小箭头）与胼胝体（大箭头）在颜色上的区别。	Figure 12: Note the difference in color between the cingulate gyrus (small arrow) and the corpus callosum (large arrow).
黏连非常紧密的扣带回皮质可能会被误认为是胼胝体。	Very adherent cingulate cortices may be mistaken as corpus callosum.
胼胝体呈现亮白色，明显有别于周围的脑皮质组织。	The corpus callosum is glistening white and stands out from the surrounding cortical tissue.
通过腰大池引流释放脑脊液可以使纵裂间的解剖更容易进行。	Releasing CSF from the lumbar drain will ease this interhemispheric dissection.
术者应该留心胼周动脉，避免被显微剪刀的刀尖意外损伤。	The operator should watch for the pericallosal arteries and avoid inadvertently injuring them with the tip of the microscissors.
图13：沿中线在一对胼周动脉之间充分显露胼胝体。	Figure 13: The corpus callosum is widely exposed in the midline between the paired pericallosal arteries.
从前到后广泛的锐性分离扣带回上粘连的蛛网膜，以减少对大脑半球内侧面的牵拉。	Adherent arachnoid membranes of the cingula are sharply and widely split anteriorly and posteriorly to minimize retraction on the medial hemispheres.
有时，胼周动脉可能会异位至一侧或者可能粘连在一起，分离困难。	At times, pericallosal arteries may be displaced to one side or they may also adhere together, making their separation difficult.
图14：在胶样囊肿的病例中，一个1.5cm的胼胝体切开可以广泛显露室间孔和脉络丛，大脑内和丘纹静脉。	Figure 14: In the case of a colloid cyst, a 1.5-cm callosotomy will provide wide visualization of the foramen of Monro and the choroid, internal cerebral, and thalamostriate veins.
神经导航可以指示胼胝体切开的精确位置。	Neuronavigation guides the precise location of the callosotomy.
如果透明隔疝入术区阻挡了脑室内的视野，可进行透明隔开窗，以解除疝入并清晰视野。	If the septum pellucidum herniates into the operative field and obstructes intraventricular viewing, its fenstration will relieve this herniation and clear the view.
这个疝是由双侧侧脑室在室间孔处的梗阻引起的。	This herniation is caused by biventricular obstruction at the level of the foramen of Monro.
图15：通过经纵裂入路朝向中线脑室的通路轨迹演示。	Figure 15: The roadmap through the interhemispheric trajectory toward the midline chambers is demonstrated.
注意上图像矢状位手术路径，对术者来说这很容易迷路，会沿着纵裂间空隙过于向前或者向后（箭头）。	Note the sagittal perspective in the above image. It is easy for the surgeon to become disoriented and travel too anteriorly or posteriorly (arrows) along the interhemispheric space.
导航可以为术者提供指引。	Navigation can keep the surgeon on track.
虚线是表示冠状位示意图（下图）上的解剖标志平面。	The hashed lines correspond to the landmark levels of dissection in the coronal illustration (bottom image).
这些标志包括扣带回（1），胼胝体（2）和穹窿（3）。	These levels include the cingulum (1), corpus callosum (2) and fornices (3).
如果术者没有将分离中心朝向手术目标，后续为重新修正分离中心的方向，就不得不额外破坏更多正常组织。	If the surgeon is not directing the center of dissection toward the surgical target, additional disruption of normal tissues is later necessary for re-directing the center of dissection.
图16：当必须进入对侧大脑半球时，笔者会对大脑镰进行T形切开，并且通过缝线（插入图）牵开大脑镰瓣。	Figure 16: If the contralateral hemisphere must be accessed, I make a T-shaped incision within the falx and reflect the falcine flaps using stay sutures (inset image).
这个斜线路径（绿色箭头）扩大了侧方手术角度。	This cross-court trajectory (green arrow) expands the lateral operative angles.
上图显示经后纵裂大脑镰楔前叶入路到达位于侧脑室三角区的病变。	The above sketch shows the posterior interhemisperic transfalcine transprecuneus approach for reaching lesions within the atrium.
彻底止血后，硬脑膜进行水密缝合。	Once hemostasis is achieved, the dura is closed in a watertight fashion.
不要去除上矢状窦上的速即纱或明胶海绵。	Surgicel or gelfoam on the superior sagittal sinus should not be removed.
如果术中脑室被打开，术后常需短暂留置一根脑室内引流管，以将脑室内的组织碎片引流干净。	A ventricular catheter may be required briefly during the postoperative period to clear ventricular debris if the ventricles were entered during surgery.
术后病人在转到普通病房前需要在ICU监测 1-2天。	Patients are observed in the Intensive Care Unit for 1 or 2 days before they are transferred to the wards.
必须避免高血压和过量使用镇定剂。	Hypertension and overmedication with narcotics must be avoided.
脑室造瘘引流管常于术后第二天拔除。	The ventriculostomy catheter is usually removed on the 2nd postoperative day.
· 术中病人取侧卧位有利于重力牵引，但有些术者可能会对正常的脑室解剖产生困惑。	Placement of the patient in the lateral position during surgery is advantageous for gravity retraction, but may disorient some operators regarding the normal ventricular anatomy.
· 跨越矢状窦的开颅便于安置大脑镰上缘的牵引缝线，以轻柔翻转静脉窦，扩大经纵裂手术通道。	Extension of the craniotomy across the superior sagittal sinus allows placement of retraction sutures along the superior falx and gentle rotation of the venous sinus to expand the interhemispheric operative corridor.
· 精细操作和锐性显微外科策略能够使外科医生避免扣带回皮质的软膜下损伤。	Meticulous and sharp microsurgical maneuvers will enable the surgeon to avoid subpial injury to the cortices of the cingula.
通过腰大池引流或脑室外引流管引流脑脊液，避免暴力牵拉。	Aggressive retraction must be avoided by obtaining CSF drainage through a lumbar drain or a ventriculostomy catheter.
双额开颅术	Bifrontal Craniotomy
位于前颅窝大脑镰旁一侧或双侧的病变可以通过单侧矢状窦旁入路、翼点入路及眶颧入路相结合进行手术。	Pathologies that are positioned on one or both side(s) of the falx along the anterior fossa can be reached surgically through either the unilateral anterior parasagittal route or a combination of the supraorbital, pterional, and orbitozygomatic approaches.
这些单侧入路对于大的中线部位的病变，特别是侵犯至筛窦及蝶窦等硬膜外结构的肿瘤并不能提供足够的手术视野。	However, this type of unilateral approach may not provide adequate exposure of large midline lesions, especially tumors with extradural extension into the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses.
虽然有将骨窗扩大至眶上缘等双额前颅底扩展入路的讨论，但笔者并不认为这样的扩大骨窗是必要的；这些扩展入路并不能显著增大肿瘤的暴露范围，相反，在肿瘤切除过程中却经常会形成额外的瘤内及瘤周操作空间。	Although more expanded variations of the bifrontal approach involving mobilization of bilateral orbital rims have been described, I do not believe such osteotomies are necessary; they do not significantly broaden tumor exposure since tumor enucleation often affords additional operative working space.
而且这些扩展入路会增加颜面部外观畸形及脑脊液瘘的发生风险。	Moreover, these osteotomies may be associated with increased risks of cosmetic deformity and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
手术适应症	Indications for the Approach
对于双额入路，笔者只将其用于侵犯前颅底的体积较大的肿瘤。	I use a bifrontal craniotomy only for large tumors that have anterior skull base invasion.
本章节讨论采用双额开颅术切除中线部位侵犯前颅底的硬膜外病变。	This chapter therefore discusses techniques for using a bifrontal craniotomy for removal of midline extradural anterior cranial base lesions.
本入路对于单纯镰旁硬膜内肿瘤切除却不适用。	It does not address the nuances related to excision of purely parafalcine intradural tumors.
不论体积多大，几乎所有的硬膜内局限性肿瘤（比如巨大嗅沟脑膜瘤），通过单侧扩大翼点入路或者眶上外侧入路均能够轻易达到手术部位，并且通过大脑镰横切提供对侧入路。	Regardless of their size, almost all intradurally confined tumors (that is, giant olfactory groove meningiomas) can be readily approached through a unilateral extended pterional or a lateral supraorbital corridor with transection of the anterior falx to provide contralateral access.
图1. 广泛侵犯鼻腔的前颅底软骨肉瘤（上图）。	Figure 1: Anterior skull base chondrosarcoma with extensive invasion of the nasal cavities (upper images).
本病例用于阐明双额入路的适用对象。	This case illustrates appropriate indications for a bifrontal craniotomy.
由于肿瘤侵犯鼻中隔导致其不能用于颅底重建，故经鼻入路在本病例并不适用。	A transnasal approach was deemed inappropriate because the midline septal invasion of the tumor rendered the nasoseptal flap unavailable for skull base reconstruction.
下面的两图展示的是肿瘤全切后的影像学表现。	The bottom postoperative images demonstrate gross total resection of the mass.
和双额入路相比，翼点入路或者眶上外侧入路能够避开额窦，毋须牺牲上矢状窦前部，并且不需牵拉双侧额叶。	When compared with a bifrontal craniotomy, the pterional or lateral supraorbital craniotomy avoids the frontal sinuses, obviates the need for sacrifice of the anterior superior sagittal sinus, and does not require manipulation of both frontal lobes.
单侧入路经侧裂通道有助于更早的识别视神经及颈动脉，以便在后期肿瘤切除过程中得到更好的保护。	The unilateral approach also allows early identification of the optic nerve and carotid artery through the lateral trans-Sylvian trajectory and therefore facilitates their protection during the later stages of tumor dissection.
由于双额入路具有灵活的手术操作角度及更佳的肿瘤暴露视野，笔者的部分同事对于大多数的前颅窝中线部位的病变都喜欢采用该入路。	Some of my colleagues prefer to use a bifrontal craniotomy for most midline anterior cranial fossa lesions because of the flexible operative working angles and more generous exposure of the tumor.
而笔者更倾向仅对侵犯硬膜外的肿瘤采用该入路，比如嗅母细胞瘤和其它侵犯到额窦及筛窦的肿瘤。	I prefer to use this approach for extradural tumors such as esthesioblastomas and other tumors of the frontal and ethmoid sinuses.
对于颅脑外伤，比如双侧额叶挫伤伴症状性脑水肿，双额开颅或去骨瓣手术能起到减压作用。	The bifrontal craniectomy or craniotomy can also provide cerebral decompression for patients who have traumatic injuries such as bifrontal contusions associated with symptomatic cerebral edema.
同样的，该入路也能够用于修补额窦或者前颅底骨折造成的脑脊液瘘或面容畸形。	Similarly, this approach may be used for repair of frontal sinuses and other anterior skull base fractures that have caused CSF fistulas or cosmetic deformities.
由于通过双额入路抵达的大多数肿瘤体积较大，硬膜内病变切除过程中脑池暴露较晚，因此腰大池引流在松解脑组织、抵达颅底病变的过程中起到巨大作用。	Since most tumors approached through the bifrontal route are large and CSF cisterns are not accessed early during intradural dissection, a lumbar drain is highly useful for providing brain relaxation and mobilization to reach the cranial base.
一部分该区域的的脑膜瘤会侵及上矢状窦，因此术前磁共振（MRI）及CT静脉造影仍是必要的。	A meningioma in this region can infrequently involve the superior sagittal sinus, necessitating a review of preoperative magnetic resonance (MR) or computer tomography (CT) venogram.
额窦的形态术前需要进行评估，因为大额窦将会增加术后脑脊液瘘的风险。	The morphology of the frontal sinuses should be assessed because large sinuses may increase the risk of postoperative CSF leakage.
推荐常规应用带血管蒂骨膜瓣覆盖已去除粘膜的额窦及筛窦。	Routine use of a vascularized pericranial graft to cover the exenterated frontal and ethmoid sinuses is recommended.
由于被肿瘤侵犯的前颅底的切除，额窦较宽及其大范围的切除常常造成较大的颅底缺损。	Spacious frontal sinuses and their wide exposure, as well as removal of the anterior fossa floor due to tumor invasion, often create large cranial base defects.
这部分颅底缺损需要额外措施来修复，比如颅底骨及皮瓣重建，术后预防性腰大池引流。	These wide defects require additional measures such as skull base bone and flap reconstruction and prophylactic postoperative lumbar CSF drainage.
熟知前颅底解剖知识对于双额开颅术的进行是必需的。	Knowledge of the anatomy of the anterior skull base is necessary for execution of a bifrontal craniotomy.
图2. 硬脑膜移除后前颅底解剖。	Figure 2: The anatomy of the anterior cranial fossa with the dura removed.
图中所示额窦不对称（上图），可见术前影像学检查的必要性。	Notice the asymmetry of the frontal sinuses (upper image), emphasizing the need to review preoperative imaging.
骨窗下界必须达到眶顶水平。	The lower edge of the craniotomy must be at the level of the orbital roof.
鸡冠在接近嗅球及筛板处与眶顶相比形成一“山谷”。	Note the proximity of the Crista Galli to the olfactory bulbs and cribriform plate that resides in a “valley” as compared with orbital roofs.
在鸡冠及筛板水平从硬膜外切开硬膜显露硬膜内空间（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	Extradural dissection of the dura at the level of the crista Galli and cribrifom plate leads to exposure of the intradural space (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
双额开颅术	BIFRONTAL CRANIOTOMY
手术技术及细节回顾：	The details of this operative technique are reviewed.
图3. 患者取仰卧位，基于肿瘤垂直深度，头部轻微过伸或屈曲。	Figure 3: The patient is placed in the supine position with the head slightly extended or flexed based on the vertical extent of the tumor.
调整头位使额叶受重力牵拉远离颅底。	This head position mobilizes the frontal lobes away from the cranial base using gravity-induced retraction.
中线部位病变通过该入路手术基本不需要旋转头位。	The head typically does not require rotation for the midline pathologies accessed through this route.
如图所示，三钉头架中的单钉固定于一侧耳后上方，对侧两根头钉固定于耳廓上方。	The single pin of the skull clamp is just above and behind the pinna, while the contralateral and bisecting two pins are located above the pinna as illustrated.
三钉应固定在合适的位置，避免对冠状皮肤切口造成影响。	The positions of the pins should be appropriately planned to avoid their interference with the bicoronal skin incision.
图4. 冠状切口（黑色实线）。	Figure 4: A bicoronal incision is designed (dark solid line).
切口位于发际内尽可能靠前。	This incision should be as anterior as possible while staying behind the hairline.
切口并不一定总是要达到耳屏水平，但至少应该达到耳廓上缘水平。	The incision does not always need to reach the tragus, but it at least should reach to the level of the superior edge of the pinna.
患者颈部的屈曲程度依据肿瘤颅内扩展及向下扩展到鼻窦的情况而定。	The extent of the patient’s neck flexion is tailored based on the cranial extension and inferior reach of the tumor into the nasal sinuses.
图5. 头皮切开应保持骨膜、颞肌及筋膜的完整。	Figure 5: The scalp incision should leave the pericranium, temporalis muscle, and fascia intact.
常规分离带血管蒂的骨膜瓣作为单独一层。	I routinely elevate a vascularized pericranial graft as a separate layer.
完全分离帽状腱膜层及骨膜层之间的腱膜下层，尽量向远离切口方向分离以便能够翻起更大的骨膜瓣（左图）。	The plane between the galea and pericranium is dissected/undermined more posteriorly beyond the incision to allow for elevation of a larger pericranial graft (left image).
单极电凝将骨膜后部及侧方自颞上线处离断。	Monopolar electrocautery disconnects the posterior and lateral attachments of the pericranium (to the superior temporal line).
至此形成一以眶上缘为基底，反折的带血管蒂骨膜瓣。	This vascularized graft will be reflected and based anteriorly along the orbital rims.
术中将骨膜瓣翻起，伸展并用潮湿海绵包裹保持湿润（右图）。	A generous piece of pericranial flap is elevated, stretched, and kept moist during the operation by covering it with a wet piece of sponge (right image).
图6. 设计骨窗：单个骨孔位于上矢状窦前部。	Figure 6: Design of the bone flap: A single burr hole is placed over the anterior superior sagittal sinus.
骨窗垂直高度低于10cm，宽度没有必要超过整个眶上缘宽度。	The vertical height of the craniotomy is under 10 cm, and the width does not need to spread across the entire width of the orbital rims.
大多数病变，不管体积多大，均能通过有限“低”的双额开颅术抵达病变并切除（虚线）。	Most lesions, regardless of their size, can be reached and removed through a limited “low” bifrontal craniotomy (hashed line).
部分术者倾向更大的骨窗开颅（灰色实线）。	Some operators prefer a larger craniotomy (gray solid line).
如果发生术后感染，骨瓣去除后将造成更大的额骨缺损。	If larger bone flaps are infected postoperatively, their removal will leave the patient with a large frontal skull defect.
术中要注意三钉的位置，偏向后部放置将增加固定失败的风险。	Note the location of the skull clamp pins. More posterior placement of the pins risks fixation failure.
完成钻孔及腰大池引流后，用#3脑膜剥离子将硬膜从颅骨剥离。	Upon completion of the burr hole and CSF drainage through the lumbar drain, the dura is then dissected off of the calvarium using a #3 Penfield.
前额部钻孔应避免影响面容。	Burr holes in the region of the forehead are avoided for cosmetic reasons.
图7. 垂直方向颅骨切开采用带护板的铣刀（上图）。	Figure 7: The craniotome with its footplate is used to complete the vertical bony cuts (top image).
水平方向位于额窦上方骨窗缘直接采用不带护板的铣刀先切开额窦前壁，其次额窦后壁（下图）。	The final horizontal osteotomy over the frontal sinuses is performed using a straight side-cutting burr to first disconnect the anterior and then the posterior walls of the frontal sinus (bottom image).
骨瓣翻起后，用垂体钳将额窦粘膜完全剥除并用单极电凝。	Upon elevation of the bone flap, the frontal sinus mucosae are thoroughly removed using pituitary rongeurs and coagulated with monopolar electrocautery.
笔者会用肌肉、杆菌肽或碘伏浸润的骨蜡填塞额窦，或者采用碘伏浸润的明胶海绵填塞但要在硬膜闭合后将其取出。	I use muscle, betadine, or bacitracin-soaked bone wax to fill the sinuses. Alternatively, the sinuses are filled with betadine-soaked gelfoam and exenteration and cranialization will be completed at the end of the procedure when the dura is closed.
图8. 将骨窗下界突出的骨缘以及额窦后壁磨除以免阻挡额底手术视野。	Figure 8: The inferior overhanging edges of the craniotomy and posterior walls of the frontal sinuses are removed to prevent them from obstructing the operator’s view toward the basal frontal lobe.
接下来是关于侵犯颅骨及鼻窦的颅底肿瘤硬膜外切除的一些细节问题。	The following details refer to extradural resection of skull base tumors invading the bone and nasal sinuses.
图9. 颞肌可用于填塞开放的额窦。	Figure 9: Pieces of temporalis muscle may also be used to fill the frontal sinuses.
进一步行腰大池引流使硬膜外剥离、脑叶脱离鸡冠、筛板的暴露成为可能。	Further CSF drainage allows extradural dissection and lobar elevation away from the Crista Galli and exposure of the cribiform plate.
利用#1脑膜剥离子将硬脑膜从眶上缘及鸡冠剥离。	The dura is mobilized from the orbital roof and Crista Galli using a #1 Penfield dissector.
图10. 利用吸引器对额叶实现动态牵拉。	Figure 10: I dynamically retract the frontal lobes using the suction apparatus.
将嗅球进行锐性分离，暴露硬膜外扩展的肿瘤前部（星形）。	Sharp dissection is used over the olfactory bulb to disconnect the bulb and expose the anterior extradural extension of the tumor (star).
术中图像展示的是一侵犯鼻腔的前颅底软骨肉瘤切除术（上文图1）。	This intraoperative image refers to resection of an anterior skull base chondrosarcoma invading the nasal cavities (See Figure 1 above).
锐性分离嗅球直接造成硬膜敞开并且显露肿瘤的硬膜内部分。	Disconnection of the bulb also leads to dural opening and disclosure of the intradural portions of the tumor.
图11. 在肿瘤完全切除、采用颞肌筋膜瓣修复硬脑膜缺损使其完全闭合后，颅底可见一大的骨质缺损。	Figure 11: After gross total resection of the tumor and watertight closure of the dural defect using a piece of temporalis fascia graft, a large skull base defect is apparent.
本图上部显示的是完整的骨膜瓣。	The pericranial graft is seen at the top of the image.
图12. 如果术者希望通过双额入路抵达完全位于硬膜内的肿瘤，比如脑膜瘤，于平行骨缘方向切开硬脑膜（A和B）。	Figure 12: If the operator desires to approach purely intradural tumors such as meningiomas through a bifrontal approach, the dura may be opened through two horizontal incisions parallel to upper edge of craniotomy (A and B).
上矢状窦前部用0号丝线间断结扎，然后离断。	The anterior superior sagittal sinus is then ligated with 0-silk sutures in two spots and divided.
尽管矢状窦旁前部的桥静脉被认为是不重要的，但术者在牺牲它们的过程中仍要小心。	Although anterior parasagittal bridging veins are considered dispensable, the operator must exercise caution during their sacrifice.
吸引器头端清晰可见肿瘤组织（C）。	The tumor is evident at the tip of suction apparatus (C).
缺损的硬脑膜采用一块颞肌筋膜瓣完全封闭，额窦利用骨膜瓣覆盖（D和E）。	The dura is then closed using a piece of temporalis fascia and the pericranium is used to cover the frontal sinuses (D and E).
在上矢状窦离断处切开大脑镰，将硬膜下垂部分反折至前方。	The falx can then be sectioned where the superior sagittal sinus was divided and the inferior flap of dura is reflected anteriorly.
如果需要额外的硬膜内手术通道，硬膜切开的侧方可以向后扩展直至获得做够的暴露视野。	If additional intradural access is required, the lateral ends of the dural incision are extended posteriorly until adequate exposure is secured.
由于颈部的过伸，额叶由于重力的牵拉会远离前颅底，从而获得足够的手术通道。	With the neck extended, the frontal lobes should fall away from the floor, allowing wide access to the tumor.
病变通过显微手术得到恰当的处理。	The lesion is microsurgically handled as appropriate.
肿瘤切除完成后，硬膜必须严密缝合。	After tumor resection is complete, watertight closure of the dura is necessary; a piece of temporalis fascia may be used for dural autografting.
可利用颞肌筋膜瓣行硬脑膜自体移植修补。	The frontal sinus requires further exenteration.
将抗生素浸润的纱布覆盖硬脑膜，并且移除之前碘伏浸润的明胶海绵。	Antibiotic-soaked gauze is placed over the dura and the previously used packing of betadine-soaked gelfoam is removed.
进一步清除额窦内容物。	Any residual mucosa is coagulated away using monopolar electrocautery.
所有残留的粘膜采用单级电凝后清除干净。额窦利用肌肉、脂肪或者骨蜡填塞，骨膜瓣向后反折覆盖额窦及前颅底缺损。	The frontal sinus is packed with muscle, fat or bone wax and the pericranial graft is reflected posteriorly to cover the frontal sinuses and the anterior skull base defect.
图13. 将多余的骨膜切除，采用连续缝合法将其边缘尽可能向后沿着前颅底与硬脑膜紧密缝合（上图）。	Figure 13: Excess pericranium is amputated and its edge is sutured to the dura along the floor of the anterior fossa as posteriorly as possible in a running fashion (top image).
骨膜瓣作为一层带血管蒂的组织将颅腔与鼻腔分开（下图）。	The pericranial graft provides a sheet of vascularized tissue to separate the intracranial space from the nasal cavity (bottom image).
图14. 如果肿瘤切除后筛窦暴露并且伴有大面积骨质缺损，笔者会用颅骨铣开时分离的颅骨瓣覆盖在用于修复颅底骨质缺损的骨膜瓣上方（注意不是下方）。	Figure 14: If a large area of ethmoid sinuses is exposed and a wide bony defect is present at the end of tumor resection, I prepare a split calvarial bone graft from the craniotomy bone flap and place the bone graft over (not under) the pericranial flap that is in place over the skull base defect.
可以使用钛钉将这一骨片固定眶顶。	This piece of bone may be fixed to the orbital roof using small titanium screws.
这样的骨质重建在稳固颅底结构的同时，可以避免患者因大力咳嗽或打喷嚏引起的骨膜瓣移位。	This bony reconstruction reinforces the skull base construct and avoids displacement of the pericranial graft by the patient’s forceful coughing or sneezing.
笔者会在术后48小时持续进行腰大池脑脊液引流。	I use a lumbar drain to divert CSF for 48 hours after surgery.
这一措施保证了颅“内部”与“外部”环境之间存在足够的界限。	This maneuver ensures that adequate borders are maintained between the ‘outside’ and ‘inside’ worlds.
患者在ICU监护1到2天后转入普通病房。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit for a day or two and then transferred to the ward.
有一小部分患者并未出现术后即刻发生脑脊液瘘的迹象，但术后CT却发现大量颅腔积气。	There are rare patients who have no evidence of a leak immediately postoperatively, but demonstrate a significant amount of pneumocephalus on their postoperative CT scan.
如果出现这种情况，必须怀疑存在大的脑脊液瘘口，并且需要通过再次手术修复。	In this situation, a large leak must be suspected and corrected through a repeat operation.
否则持续腰大池引流会引起气体自鼻腔逆向吸入，造成颅腔积气加重。	Otherwise, continuation of lumbar drainage will lead to reverse suctioning of air through the nose and dramatic worsening of the pneumocephalus.
这一连续反应可能引起急性神经功能恶化及颅内感染。	These cascades may cause acute neurologic deterioration and infection.
采用带血管蒂游离组织皮瓣行颅底重建及严密闭合硬脑膜的二次手术常常很有必要。	A repeat operation with careful dural closure and skull base reconstruction using vascularized regional and free tissue-transfer flaps are often necessary.
总结	Pearls and Pitfalls
·   腰大池引流对于术中松解脑组织作用巨大。	A lumbar drain can be useful when immediate intraoperative brain relaxation is required.
术后需要短期脑脊液引流时，腰大池引流也能被用到。	It can also be used postoperatively when short-term CSF diversion is necessary.
·   本入路采用相对较小的骨窗是很有效的。	A relatively small craniotomy is very effective in this approach.
大的骨窗将使发生术后感染的患者承受更大的颅骨缺损风险。	Large craniotomies place the patient at risk of a large bony defect if postoperative infection occurs.
·   双额入路手术适应症相对有限。	A bifrontal craniotomy has relatively limited indications.
大部分硬膜内肿瘤可以通过扩大翼点入路行肿瘤切除术。	Most intradural tumors may be removed through the expanded pterional route.
枕下入路	Suboccipital Craniotomy
哈维·库欣（Harvey Cushing）的历史性贡献之一就是明确了后颅窝肿瘤的手术入路。	Historically, one of the most important contributions of Harvey Cushing was defining surgery of posterior fossa tumors.
对手术病人严格的术前评估、精细的操作技巧及脑室穿刺和电凝技术的联合应用使得后颅窝肿瘤的切除技术得到极大提高。	Resection techniques for tumors in this region were further advanced by mandatory preoperative evaluation for selection of appropriate patients, meticulous surgical techniques, and incorporation of methods such as ventricular puncture and electrocautery.
十九世纪五十年代显微外科技术的引进革命性的推动了后颅窝的手术预后。	Introduction of microsurgical techniques in the 1950s ultimately revolutionized the results of posterior fossa surgery.
目前，后颅窝最常用的手术入路包括枕下中线和枕下外侧入路（乳突后入路）。	Nowadays, the most common workhorse approaches to the posterior fossa include the midline suboccipital and the lateral suboccipital (retromastoid) approaches.
小脑上入路是上述方式的一种改良入路。	The supracerebellar craniotomy is a modification of these approaches.
乳突后入路和小脑上入路将会在相应章节予以讨论。	The retromastoid craniotomy  and supracerebellar craniotomy  are discussed in their own corresponding chapters.
枕下中线入路可以较好的暴露大部分小脑蚓，脑桥后下部和髓帆，枕骨大孔，小脑中线以及松果体区。	The midline suboccipital craniotomy is the preferred mode of exposure for the majority of vermian, posterior inferior pontine and medullary, foramen magnum, midline cerebellum, and pineal regions.
侵及四脑室的病变首选膜髓帆入路。	Lesions affecting the fourth ventricle are best approached through the telovelar approach.
枕下中线入路的主要适应症如下：	The most common indications for midline suboccipital craniotomy are:
1．发育异常：如Chiari畸形，	developmental anomalies such as Chiari malformations,
2．后颅窝肿瘤：如转移性肿瘤、脑膜瘤、室管膜瘤，星形细胞瘤和髓母细胞瘤，	posterior fossa tumors such as metastatic tumors, meningiomas, ependymomas, astrocytomas, and medulloblastomas,
3．血管性疾病：如动脉瘤、海绵状血管瘤和动静脉畸形，	vascular lesions such as aneurysms, cavernous malformations, and arteriovenous malformations, and
4．累及小脑上脚的松果体区肿瘤，对于从后颅窝延伸到中颅窝的病变可采用小脑上入路或中后颅窝联合入路。	pineal region tumors accessed through the supracerebellar corridor. For lesions extending from the posterior fossa into the middle fossa, a supracerebellar transtentorial or combined middle and posterior fossa craniotomy is recommended.
与幕上相比，幕下空间容积较小并且包含如脑干及后组颅神经等诸多重要结构。	When compared with its counterpart supratentorial compartment, the infratentorial compartment has limited space and contains vital structures such as brainstem and cranial nerves.
这些因素使得后颅窝手术的风险极大，因此在术前准备、术中操作和术后护理过程中需要尽可能的关注细节。	These factors make surgery in the posterior fossa risky, so the utmost attention to details during preoperative planning, operative execution, and postoperative care is required.
后颅窝肿瘤常引起梗阻性脑积水，因此在打开硬膜前应释放部分脑脊液降低颅内压。	Because posterior fossa tumors often cause obstructive hydrocephalus, preoperative planning should include methods to relieve cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure before the dural opening.
某些肿瘤切除后可能会解除脑脊液梗阻，所以要避免进行术前分流。	Preoperative shunting is avoided because resection of some tumors resolves CSF obstruction and obviates the need for a permanent CSF diversion procedure.
对于合并有交通性脑积水的病人，术中腰大池脑脊液引流可减轻脑压，并且当病变早期未侵犯小脑延髓池和桥小脑角池时效果更佳。	In patients with communicating hydrocephalus, intraoperative lumbar CSF drainage affords brain relaxation. This drainage is particularly useful in situations when the location of the lesion prohibits early access to the cisterna magna and the cerebellopontine angle cisterns.
靠近脑干和颅神经的病变在手术时可采用神经电生理检测。	Neurophysiologic monitoring is indicated during operations for lesions near the brainstem and cranial nerves.
通过对第四脑室底部面神经核的检测可以降低致残率。	To minimize morbidity, the fourth ventricular floor may be mapped for the facial nucleus.
术前详细的影像学评估可以帮助术者了解术中操作时的危险区域。	Careful study of preoperative imaging will warn the operator about risky dissection territories.
移除脑血管结构前要通过术前影像学和术中的详细评估。	Displaced cerebrovascular structures should be studied on preoperative imaging and anticipated intraoperatively.
侵犯脑干软脑膜表面的肿瘤要进行影像学评估，对靠近脑干的肿瘤进行次全切除术。	Invasion of the brainstem pial surface by the tumor should be evaluated on imaging, and a radical subtotal resection should be planned that leaves a thin sheet of tumor over the brainstem.
要特别注意血供丰富的后颅窝肿瘤，如动静脉畸形和血管母细胞瘤。	Highly vascular tumors of the posterior fossa, including AVMs and hemangioblastomas, require special attention.
大的实质性血管母细胞瘤进行术前栓塞可以降低术中失血量。	Large solid hemangioblastomas can be daunting tumors, and aggressive preoperative embolization may decrease the patient’s risk of life-threatening intraoperative blood loss.
图1. 枕骨骨性标志。	Figure 1: Osteology of the suboccipital bone.
上项线和枕骨粗隆分别作为横窦和窦汇的体表标志。	The superior nuchal line and inion estimate the locations of the transverse sinuses and torcula, respectively.
星点不是横窦和乙状窦硬脑膜连接处的可靠标志，在星点上钻孔经常落在横窦之上，有造成横窦出血的风险（该图片由AL Rhoton Jr授权）。	The asterion is not a reliable landmark for the transverse sigmoid junction dura, and a burr hole over the asterion usually lands on the transverse sinus and places this structure at risk (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图2. 移除枕骨暴露相关硬脑膜窦，图片展示小脑的表面解剖结构 (该图片由AL Rhoton Jr 授权)。	Figure 2: Removal of the suboccipital bone exposes the corresponding dural sinuses. The surface anatomy of the cerebellum is shown (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3. 注意在颅颈交界水平（在枕骨大孔和颈椎C1节段寰椎之间）硬脑膜没有骨性结构的覆盖。	Figure 3: Note the dura is not covered by bone at the level of the craniocervical junction (between the foramen magnum and C1).
在寰椎椎弓侧方走行的椎动脉（沟动脉）也没有骨性结构覆盖。	The vertebral artery segment over the lateral arch of C1 (sulcus arteriosus) is also not covered by bone.
当术者在颅颈交界区使用单极电凝时要小心操作，在分离肌肉时要避免刺穿硬脑膜和损伤动脉。	The operator should exercise caution while using monopolar electrocautery at the craniocervical junction and avoid penetrating the dura or injuring the artery during muscle dissection.
建议在该部位操作时要仔细钝性分离(该图片由AL Rhoton Jr 提供)。	Careful blunt dissection in the region is advised (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4. 第四脑室底部功能解剖（左图）。	Figure 4: The functional anatomy of the fourth ventricular floor is shown (left image).
移除小脑后展示小脑上动脉（SCA）、小脑下前动脉（AICA）和小脑下后动脉（PICA）的走行（右图----侧面观）(该图片由AL Rhoton Jr 提供)。	The route of the superior cerebellar artery (SCA), the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) after removal of the cerebellum is demonstrated (right image—oblique view)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
枕下中线开颅术	MIDLINE SUBOCCIPITAL CRANIOTOMY
病人采取俯卧位、坐位或侧俯卧位。	The patient may be positioned in either the prone, sitting, or park-bench position.
作者喜欢采用侧俯卧位，因为重力可以使手术视野更清晰，而且可以坐着完成显微操作部分。	I prefer the park-bench position because gravity will keep the field clear during surgery and I can sit during the microsurgical portion of the operation.
如果患者采用俯卧位，两位手术医生能够通过显微镜同时观察并进行手术操作。	If the patient is placed in the prone position, two surgeons are able to work simultaneously through co-observation with the microscope.
但是，当患者采用该体位时，尤其是肥胖患者，由于小脑幕的急转角度会使得小脑上入路变得相对困难。	The steep angle of the tentorium, however, makes the prone position relatively impractical for the supracerebellar approach, especially if the patient is obese.
患者采用坐位时，借助重力因素可以更容易将小脑和小脑幕分离，从而有利于采取小脑上入路。	The sitting position allows gravity retraction to mobilize the cerebellum away from the tentorium and is advantageous for supracerebellar corridors.
但是，静脉空气栓塞的风险和术中不舒适的手臂姿势使得手术医生不喜欢采取该体位。	However, the risk of venous air embolism and the need for uncomfortable arm postures may motivate some operators to avoid this position.
图5. 手术室布局说明。	Figure 5: The operating room setup is illustrated.
患者采用改良的侧俯卧位，器械护士站立于手术医生的对面从而更高效率的传递器械。	The patient is placed in a modified park-bench position. The assistant handling the instruments should stand across from the surgeon to transfer the instruments efficiently.
麻醉医师可以位于手术床的末端。	The anesthesiologist may be placed at the foot of the table.
这种布局可以为其它操作团队提供额外的空间。	This configuration provides additional room for the rest of the operating team.
图6. 患者头部向地板方向旋转45°并用头颅夹固定。	Figure 6: The patient’s head is turned 45 degrees toward the floor and immobilized in a skull clamp.
手术切口通常从枕骨粗隆延伸到枢椎的棘突。	The incision generally extends from the inion to the C2 spinous process.
考虑到脑积水可能要进行术中脑室造瘘术，可以提前准备好基恩氏点（该图根据Tew，van Loveren和 Keller的图片重新绘制）。	Keen’s point may be prepared if an intraoperative ventriculostomy is contemplated because of hydrocephalus (Redrawn from Tew, van Loveren, Keller*).
图7. 沿着中线无血管的筋膜区域依次切开皮肤及深部各层组织到达枕骨下部。	Figure 7: The incision is extended through the deep layers and to the level of the suboccipital bone along the midline avascular fascial planes.
切口沿着中线无血管的筋膜可以避免术后颈痛。	It is important to stay within the midline avascular plane to avoid postoperative neck pain.
采用单极电凝分离附着在上项线的肌肉，将肌肉从骨膜下方抬高，从而使其与下面的枕骨分离。	The muscle attachments to the superior nuchal line are disconnected using monopolar electrocautery, and the muscles are elevated from the underlying occipital bone in a subperiosteal fashion.
从寰椎后弓侧方进行解剖时要仔细，并采用低功率烧灼参数；钝性分离可以防止对椎动脉造成损伤。	Lateral dissection over the posterior arch of C1 should be performed with caution and at lower cautery settings; blunt dissection is advised to prevent injury to the vertebral artery.
沟动脉从寰椎弓侧方的沟中延伸出以后变得非常迂曲，而且可能走行于枕部下方的肌肉中。	This artery can have a very tortuous route outside its groove over the lateral arch of C1 (sulcus arteriosus) and may travel within the suboccipital muscles.
随意烧灼可能造成动脉损伤。	Indiscriminate use of cautery can lead to vascular injury.
包裹动脉的静脉丛的活跃出血往往提示动脉就在附近（该图根据Tew，van Loveren和 Keller的图片重新绘制 ）。	Brisk bleeding from the venous plexus encasing the artery is a warning sign that the artery is nearby (Redrawn from Tew, van Loveren, Keller*).
图8. 作者采取在横窦上方的枕骨钻两个孔，将硬脑膜和横窦、窦汇的壁从枕骨内壁分离。	Figure 8: I prefer to place two burr holes over the transverse sinuses and dissect the dura and the wall of the sinuses, including the torcula, away from the inner skull bone.
然后借助带有防护挡板的铣刀在硬脑膜上方切割骨瓣。	Next, I use a craniotome with a footplate to inscribe the bone flap over the dura.
为了保护静脉窦，在其上方进行最后切割时借助不带有防护挡板的B1型铣刀。	The last cut over the sinuses is done using the B1 bit without a footplate to protect the venous sinuses.
或者，在硬膜上方完成开颅术后用磨钻将静脉窦上方骨头逐层磨掉（上图）。	Alternatively, a craniotomy over the dura may be completed and the bone over the sinuses drilled away in layers (upper images).
其它选择包括在中线两侧分别进行两个小的开颅术（左下图），然后再将中线的骨头切断（右下图）。	Other options include two small craniotomies on either side of the midline septum (lower left image). The remaining midline bone may then be disconnected in a second step (lower right image).
咬骨钳可以将骨窗向侧方延伸到枕骨髁的位置（该图根据Tew，van Loveren和 Keller的图片重新绘制 ）。	Kerrison rongeurs may extend the opening laterally to the level of the occipital condyles (Redrawn from Tew, van Loveren, Keller*).
图9. 对于枕骨大孔区和上颈椎的损伤，为了更广泛的开放硬脑膜和充分暴露损伤区域，需要进行寰椎椎板切除术。	Figure 9: For lesions involving the foramen magnum and upper cervical spine, a C1 laminectomy is performed to allow for a wider dural opening and adequate lesional exposure.
通常沿着枕骨大孔移除骨瓣，可以提供一个更灵活的经膜髓帆入路到达第四脑室病变的通道。	Generous removal of the bone along the magnum affords a more flexible inferior-to-superior trajectory to reach fourth ventricular lesions through the telovelar route.
Y型剪开硬脑膜，切口尽量向下延伸以便将硬脑膜瓣更好的向两侧移动。	The dura is generally opened in a Y-shaped fashion with a more inferior extension for more lateral mobilization of the dural flaps.
硬膜上方切口延伸到横窦下方。	The superior limb of the dural incision extends to the inferior aspect of the transverse sinus.
中线部位的病变，硬膜可以沿着中线切开；这种方法可以使术后硬脑膜缝合的更加严密（该图根据Tew，van Loveren和 Keller的图片重新绘制 ）。	For midline lesions, the dura may be opened along the midline; this maneuver facilitates watertight dural closure (Redrawn from Tew, van Loveren, Keller*).
图10. 打开覆盖在小脑延髓池上的蛛网膜来释放脑脊液，从而减轻脑部受压。	Figure 10: The arachnoid overlying the cistern magna may be opened to drain CSF and achieve brain relaxation.
根据实际病变，用蛛网膜刀和纤维剪解剖中线的蛛网膜（左图）。	Depending on the pathology at hand, the arachnoid over the midline is dissected using an arachnoid knife and microscissors (left image).
经小脑蚓或膜髓帆入路更容易到达第四脑室病变（右图）（该图根据Tew，van Loveren和 Keller的图片重新绘制 ）。	The transvermian or preferably the telovelar approach may be used to reach fourth ventricular lesions (right image)(Redrawn from Tew, van Loveren, Keller*).
病人在ICU观察一天或两天，然后转移到病房。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit for a day or two and then transferred to the ward.
预防性应用类固醇以减少无菌性脑膜炎的风险。	Steroids are administered prophylactically to minimize the risk of aseptic meningitis.
如果患者术前存在脑积水，术中植入脑室引流管，该导管在手术过程中应该留置，术后拔除。	If preoperative hydrocephalus was present and a ventricular catheter was implanted intraoperatively, this catheter should be left in place during surgery and “weaned off” postoperatively.
术中大幅度牵拉小脑会导致术后影像学上的牵拉水肿，最终出现后颅窝压力增高的症状，此时需要进行减压处理。	Aggressive retraction of the cerebellum can lead to retraction edema shown on postoperative imaging that can ultimately cause symptomatic posterior fossa tension and a need for decompression.
在关闭硬脑膜和骨瓣置换时要非常仔细，如果大脑出现肿胀，关闭硬脑膜时采用减张缝合，不用回纳骨瓣。	Therefore, caution should be exercised during dural closure and bone flap replacement. If the brain appears swollen, the dural closure should not cause more tension and the bone flap should not be replaced.
横窦内潜在的血栓形成或牺牲小脑蚓部引流静脉都可能引起持续性脑肿胀。	This brain swelling is compounded by potential partial transverse sinus thrombosis and vermian veins sacrifice.
在颅颈交界区使用单极电凝时，手术操作要仔细，避免刺破硬脑膜或在分离肌肉时损伤椎动脉。	The operator should exercise caution while using monopolar electrocautery at the craniocervical junction and avoid penetrating the dura or injuring the vertebral artery during muscle dissection.
建议在该部位采用钝性分离方法。	The use of careful blunt dissection in the region is advised.
在静脉窦的操作过程中空气栓塞的风险是很大的，术者应该对该并发症给予足够重视。	The risk of air embolism during manipulation of the venous sinuses is significant and the operator should exercise a low threshold of suspicion for this complication.
乳突后入路	Retromastoid Craniotomy
如同翼点入路在幕上鞍旁病变的角色一样，乳突后入路是处理桥小脑角及脑干腹外侧病变的最常用途径。	As in the case with the pterional craniotomy for supratentorial parasellar lesions, the retromastoid craniotomy is the workhorse of infratentorial approaches for reaching the cerebellopontine (CP) angle and ventrolateral brainstem.
翼点入路中，为了更好地暴露额下及鞍旁区域，可以削平眶上裂外侧的蝶骨嵴与眶顶壁，我们称之为扩大翼点入路；	Based on the definition of the extended pterional approach, lateral sphenoid wing is resected to the level of the superior orbital fissure and the roof of the orbit is flattened to provide an unobstructed operative corridor toward the subfrontal and parasellar area.
同理，可以将去处部分乙状窦表面骨质的做法称为扩大乳突后入路。	Similarly, I define the extended retromastoid approach as a modification of the standard retromastoid craniotomy that includes partial removal of the bone over the sigmoid sinus.
这种方法使得乙状窦可以随剪开的硬膜由缝线往前牵开，从而更好地从外侧暴露桥小脑角，同时小脑的牵拉反而减轻。	This “untethering” of the sigmoid sinus allows its lateral mobilization using retraction sutures after dural opening. This maneuver expands the lateral operative trajectory toward the CP angle while reducing the retraction on the cerebellar hemisphere.
乙状窦表面骨质的去除范围一定是由具体病变的暴露需求决定，本篇我们只讨论扩大乳突后入路的一般原则，聚焦于特殊病变（如颅神经受压综合征）处理的各篇会描述该入路在各病变中的实际应用。	This extended retromastoid craniotomy must be tailored to the specific target pathology.  The following steps describe the general principles of this approach, whereas the individual chapters on specific lesions and disorders (ie cranial nerve compression syndromes) review tailored exposures via this route.
乳突后入路灵活、高效，并为所有神经外科医师熟识。	This approach is flexible, efficient and familiar to all neurosurgeons.
通过轻微牵拉小脑，该入路的灵活性与多向性使得它可以处理几乎所有桥小脑角及脑干腹外侧的病变。	This versatile and adaptable exposure can reach almost all lesions within the CP angle and ventrolateral brainstem with gentle retraction and mobilization of the forgiving lateral cerebellar hemisphere.
与各种岩骨切除术比较，并发症更低的扩大乙状窦后入路在暴露脑干腹外侧及腹侧病变时同样具有许多相似的优点，这样看来，前者似乎被过度使用了。	The different petrosectomy exposures to the ventrolateral and anterior brainstem are most likely overutilized as the extended retrosigmoid route offers many of the same advantages with minimal morbidity.
肿瘤的位置及大小对选择合适的手术入路起决定性作用，但是当我们犹豫是否需要更大的入路到达脑干腹侧时，肿瘤的质地、是否可被吸引器吸走具有非常重要的参考意义。	Although the location and size of the tumors dictate the appropriate operative approach, the texture of the tumor-fibrous (meningioma), soft and suckable (epidermoid)-also plays a crucial role in selection of a more expanded pathway to the anterior brainstem.
例如，乙状窦后入路可以切除跨越脑干腹侧的巨大表皮样囊肿，然而包裹血管的脑干腹外侧的质韧脑膜瘤却需要选择岩骨切除术。	For example, a large epidermoid tumor crossing the ventral brainstem can be removed through the retrosigmoid approach while a similar fibrous ventralateral meningioma with vascular encasement may require petrosectomy.
图1.巨大的前庭神经鞘瘤（左）和脑干腹侧的表皮样囊肿（右）皆可通过扩大乙状窦后入路切除。	Figure 1:  Giant acoustic tumors (left) and ventrally located epidermoids (right) can be removed though an expanded retrosigmoid approach.
简而言之，在暴露腹外侧中脑及上斜坡的基础上，扩大乙状窦后入路可以额外获得往腹外侧延髓和下斜坡的视角。	In simple terms, the operative corridor for the extended retrosigmoid approach extends from the ventrolateral midbrain and upper clivus to the ventrolateral medulla and lower clivus.
对于术中可能需动态牵拉或者影响面听神经束的手术，如面肌痉挛的微血管减压术，推荐监测脑干听觉诱发电位（BAERs），V波波峰延迟是指示蜗神经损伤的最佳电生理学指标。	Monitoring brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) during microvascular decompression (MVD) for hemifacial spasm and other lesions that potentially require dynamic retraction parallel to and affecting the CN VII/VIII complex is recommended. Latency of peak V is considered the best electrophysiologic indicator for signaling cochlear nerve injury.
对侧听力丧失可能是乳突后入路的一个禁忌征。	Contralateral hearing loss may be a contraindication for retromastoid craniotomy.
横窦、乙状窦的位置存在变异。	The transverse and sigmoid venous sinuses may have a slightly variable location along the temporal and occipital bones.
颈项短或者头型宽短者有时可见乙状窦短小或横窦－乙状窦的交界处下移，术前应仔细研究影像学资料并在术中留意，因为这些解剖学变异会误导术者造成静脉窦损伤或者限制骨窗的暴露。	Patients with short necks or mild brachycephaly may also have a short sigmoid sinus and their transverse-sigmoid junction may be displaced inferiorly, disrepecting anatomical landmarks. These variations can be studied on preoperative scans and considered during craniotomy. These anatomical variations can easily disorient the surgeon and lead to venous sinus injury or restricted bony exposure leading to ineffective lesional access.
气化良好的乳突气房会增加术后脑脊液漏的概率，应引起重视。	Generous mastoid air cells increase the risk of postoperative CSF fistula.
相关解剖	Operative Anatomy
图2.上图展示了乙状窦、横窦及两者与乳突尖等骨性结构的关系；	Figure 2: The transverse and venous sinuses and their relationships to bony anatomy including the mastoid tip and groove (top image).
下图为乳突后入路暴露桥小脑角的术野。	Exposure of cerebrovascular structures within the right cerebellopontine (CP) angle through the retromastoid approach in demonstrated (bottom image).
三叉神经位于远离术者的术野深面，而面听神经束位置表浅，位于上手术通道的斜下方。	Please note that the trigeminal nerve is “deeper” within the operative field and further away from the surgeon while the CN VII/VIII complex is more superficial and follows an oblique inferior to superior trajectory (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
乳突后开颅	RETROMASTOID CRANIOTOMY
图3.术者站着开颅，进行显微操作时则取坐位。	Figure 3: The surgical technician who hands the instruments to the surgeon stands across from the surgeon.
洗手护士位于术者对面，以便于传递手术器械。	The surgeon either stands (during exposure and craniotomy) or sits (during intradural microsurgery). This position of the surgeon relative to the technician allows an easy transfer of surgical instruments between them.
麻醉医师站在患者足端以为助手及其他手术团队成员腾出更多空间。	The anesthesiologist may stand by the patient’s foot—this provides additional space for assistants and the rest of the operating team.
笔者习惯坐着进行显微操作，因此，在后颅窝手术时，患者的体位是侧卧位。	I prefer to be sitting during microsurgery and position the patient with this preference in mind (lateral position for posterior fossa operations).
图5.乳突位于术野的最高点，头架固定。	Figure 5: The position of the patient’s head in the skull clamp with the mastoid bone the highest point within the operative field is demonstrated.
稍微旋转头部可以扩大手术通道，因此术者可以绕过小脑暴露桥小脑角。	Note that the slight head rotation assists with expanding the operative corridor while the surgeon “goes around” the cerebellum to expose the CP angle.
同时，头钉的位置应远离术区。	The pins of the skull clamp are situated outside the operator’s working zone.
患者的头部稍屈曲并垂向地面，床头上抬15度，随后手术床取Trendelenburg位以使患者的头下移10度，这样术区便位于水平平面。	The head of the patient is slightly flexed and turned toward the floor. The head of the bed may be flexed 15 degrees upward, and then the entire table is slightly angled in the Trendelenburg position to lower the patient’s head 10 degrees.  The latter maneuver brings the operative area into a horizontal plane.
位于中斜坡水平并移位脑干的肿瘤，垂头是没有必要的，因为小脑半球会阻挡往内侧面脑干的视角。	For tumors approaching the middle aspect of the clivus and displacing the brainstem, I do not rotate the head toward the floor so that the operative viewing angle toward the medial brainstem is not compromised by the overhanging lateral cerebellar hemisphere.
图6.以假想的横窦与乙状窦交界处下缘为最高点做一倒“U”形切口，该切口优点见后叙。	Figure 6: I use the modified reverse “U” skin incision whose summit is marked just below the presumed junction of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses. Please see the advantages of this incision listed below.
过乳突沟做一垂直横窦（连接颧弓根与枕外粗隆的白色水平虚线）的线（图中的白色垂直虚线），交点即为切口最高点。	The summit is marked where the transverse sinus (the horizontal hashed line in white connecting the inion to the root of zygoma) crosses the vertical hashed line in white, marking the mastoid groove.
对于大的前庭神经鞘瘤，可以加宽切口的基底以扩大颅骨切开的范围。	For large acoustic tumors, the base of the incision is widened so that a larger craniotomy can be accomplished.
与被广泛接受的直线形切口相比，Walter Dandy提出的这种倒“U”形切口具有许多明显的优势：	I use the modified reverse "U" incision, originally described by Walter Dandy.  This incision has certain advantages over the more commonly used variations of the linear incision. The reverse "U" incision:
1. 不需分离肌肉至枕骨大孔平面，从而减轻术后枕下区疼痛。	Obviates the need for muscle dissection caudal to the posterior fossa floor and, in my experience, leads to less postoperative suboccipital pain.
2. 将皮肌瓣下翻可以远离工作区域，而直线形切口中，皮肤肌肉层推积于头皮牵开器下方，增加了操作距离。	Reflects and mobilizes the myocutaneous scalp flap inferiorly, out of the surgeon’s working zone. The linear incision, in contrast, often accumulates the scalp and muscle layers under the scalp retractor and increases my working distance.
图7.弧形切口将皮肌瓣往下翻以远离操作区域（左图）；	Figure 7: The curvilinear incision reflects and mobilizes the myocutaneous scalp flap inferiorly, out of the surgeon’s working zone (left image).
而直线形切口中，肌肉推积于头皮牵开器下方，增加了操作距离（下图）。（图片使用经IU Health同意）	The linear incision accumulates the scalp and muscle layers under the scalp self-retaining retractor and increases the operator’s working distance (right image)(with permission from IU Health).
图8.到达桥小脑角的手术通道及方向。	Figure 8: The operative corridors and trajectories for accessing the CP are illustrated.
通往面听神经束上方病变的途径由蓝色箭头表示，而下方的病变（如小脑下外侧或者绒球下入路）依绿色箭头所示方向暴露。	The surgical corridors for reaching lesions above the CN VII/VIII complex (supralateral cerebellar approach- blue arrow) and below the CN VII/VIII complex (infralateral cerebellar or infrafloccular approach-Green arrow) are illustrated.
纯粹水平面上由外往内牵拉小脑的矢量方向与易感的前庭蜗神经平行，增加了听力损失的风险，应予以避免。	Mobilization of the cerebellum in a purely medial direction must be avoided since the vector of retraction will be parallel to the sensitive CN VIII, increasing the risk of hearing loss.
图9.辨认横窦－乙状窦交界处并在其下缘钻孔。	Figure 9: Identification of the transverse-sigmoid junction will guide placement of a burr hole just below this junction.
白色水平虚线连接颧弓根与枕外粗隆，代表横窦位置，过乳突沟作一线（白色垂直虚线）与之垂直，交点即为钻孔位置。	The burr hole is created where the transverse sinus (the hashed line in white connecting the inion to the root of the zygoma) crosses the sigmoid sinus (the hashed in black, marking the mastoid groove).
以上钻孔方法常常恰好显露两静脉窦交界处的内侧缘和下缘。	This burr hole often barely exposes the medial and inferior walls of the junction of the dural venous sinuses.
然而术中并非总能找到星点（尤其是年长患者），而且在星点上钻孔暴露的往往是横窦全宽，有潜在的损伤风险。	The asterion is not a constant finding (especially in older crania), and a burr hole over the asterion often exposes the entire width of the transverse sinus, placing this structure at risk of injury.
此外，使用撑开器和鱼钩分别牵开肌皮瓣和皮瓣可以增加骨面的显露范围。	Please note the use of a cerebellar retractor and fishhooks to enhance bone exposure through the retraction the myocutaneous flap and scalp, respectively.
图10.钻孔与颅骨成形（TN：三叉神经痛；HS：面肌痉挛；GN：舌咽神经痛；AN：听神经瘤）。	Figure 10: Burr hole and craniotomy (TN: trigeminal neuralgia; HS: hemifacial spasm; GN: glossopharyngeal neuralgia; AN: acoustic neuroma).
HS和GN术中的钻孔与骨瓣位置应稍微偏下方，这将在相应章节详细介绍。	The location of the burr hole and the craniotomy for HS and GN may be situated slightly more caudally; this modification is discussed in their corresponding chapters.
术中只钻一孔，在静脉窦交界处的边缘钻孔可以使术者预判颅骨成形／切除的边界。	I place a single burr hole at the edge of the junction of dural sinuses to orient myself regarding the desired location of the planned craniotomy/ectomy.
静脉窦的位置存在变异，因此钻孔时应当留意，不妨先试钻一小孔，然后沿正确位置扩大。	The exact location of these dural sinuses is slightly variable, and the initial burr hole should be placed with caution; it may be enlarged in the correct direction when the initial small pilot burr hole is done.
钻孔完成后即可尝试剥离硬膜。剥离静脉窦边缘时要小心，况且乙状窦可能会嵌入内板，因此必须更加小心。	I dissect the dura from the inner surface of the skull bone, paying special attention to detaching the edge of the dural sinuses, especially the sigmoid sinus.
这种情况下不要尝试去剥离，应当先“蛋壳化”乙状窦表面骨质，待后颅窝骨瓣翻开后再完全去除。	The sigmoid sinus may be embedded into the inner cortical bone and should be left alone to avoid a tear in its wall; the roof of the sigmoid sinus may be ‘egg-shelled” and removed in a second step after elevation of the bone flap.
若是微血管减压手术，1.5-2倍于25美分硬币大小的骨窗就足够了。	In the case of microvascular decompression operations, the size of the craniotomy or craniectomy is often small, about 1.5-2 times the size of a quarter coin.
骨瓣成形的第一步是铣刀先往后、往下、再往前止于乙状窦后界附近，随后从上往下沿乙状窦后缘铣除。	The first limb of the osteotomy extends posteriorly, inferiorly, then anteriorly, and stops short of the sigmoid sinus’s posterior border. The second bony cut is performed over the posterior edge of the sigmoid sinus in a cranio-caudal direction.
对于老年患者或者硬膜与内板粘连紧密者，不应做骨瓣开颅，相反，切除颅骨做骨窗开颅是更安全的选择。	A craniotomy should be avoided in older patients and in those with an adherent dural surface to the inner skull bone. When in doubt, plan a craniectomy as it is a safer option.
图11.扩大乙状窦后入路：裸露后半部分乙状窦是该入路获得更大术野的关键步骤。	Figure 11: The extended retromastoid craniotomy: Exposing the posterior half of the sigmoid sinus is the cardinal step to expand the operative corridor through this approach.
掀起骨瓣后，磨除部分乳突，显露乙状窦全长的后份。	After I complete the craniotomy and elevate the bone flap, I drill a portion of the mastoid bone, exposing the posterior edge of the sigmoid sinus along its length.
同时，去除外侧的乳突骨板和任何阻挡骨质使乙状窦可随硬膜往前翻转。	I also bevel out the outer bony edge in the area and remove any overhanging bone to improve lateral mobilization or rotation of the sigmoid sinus during reflection of the dura.
因此，尽管可能对小脑的牵拉减轻了，但是从前外侧方观察桥小脑角的视野增加了，术者的操作角度也更灵活。	This maneuver allows a more anterolateral operative trajectory toward the CP angle, potentially minimizing the need for cerebellar retraction while allowing more flexible operative working angles.
移除乙状窦表面的骨质时，最佳方法是使用磨钻的“蛋壳化”技术，因为两者之间常常粘连紧密。	The bone over the sigmoid sinus is best removed by careful drilling and “egg-shelling” since the wall of this dural sinus is often very adherent to the inner aspect of the calvarium.
钻头与钻柄的移动方向必须保持一致，以免误伤。	The drill’s handle should move in the direction of its rotating burr to avoid its inadvertent slippage over bony edges.
图12.使用Kerrison咬骨钳去除乙状窦表面的蛋壳样骨质，此时咬骨钳的张口应该背向静脉窦，以防撕裂窦壁。	Figure 12: Kerrison rongeurs remove the “egg-shell” of bone over the sigmoid sinus.
如果出现一个小破口并引起大出血，可以在邻近骨缘涂抹骨蜡将其封闭，避免使用止血材料如明胶海绵致密填塞，以防静脉栓塞形成。	The Kerrison’s “mouth” should be pointed away from the sinus to avoid a tear in the sinus wall. If excessive bleeding is encountered and a small tear in the wall of the sinus is detected, bone wax may be used to seal the hole against the edge of the mastoid bone. Indiscreet impaction of hemostatic material such as gelfoam into the sinus should be avoided to prevent sinus thrombosis.
遇到导静脉时可将其烧灼离断。	The emissary vein may be found at this juncture and coagulated.
图13.完成颅骨成形以及后续的硬膜缝合结束前都应当仔细封闭乳突气房。	Figure 13: Mastoid air cells should be well waxed, both after completing the craniotomy and later in the procedure at the end of dural closure.
在硬膜外反复做冲洗杜绝骨粉等碎屑进入硬膜下间隙，以降低术后无菌性脑膜炎的风险。	The epidural space should then be generously irrigated to prevent any debris (such as bone dust) from entering the intradural space. This maneuver can decrease the risk of postoperative aseptic meningitis.
手术通道：上外侧和下外侧途径	OPERAITVE CORRIDORS: THE SUPRALATERAL AND INFRALATERAL ROUTES
如前所述，平行前庭蜗神经的外内方向牵拉小脑可能导致术后听力下降，因此，有上外侧和下外侧两种途径可以到达桥小脑角。	As discussed previously, purely medial retraction of the cerebellar hemisphere parallel to CN VIII places this sensitive nerve at risk of retraction injury.  Therefore, I use two operative corridors initially to reach the CP angle: the supralateral and the infralateral routes.
上外侧途径：适用于面听神经束后、上方的病变	The Supralateral Route for Lesions Posterior and Superior to the CN’s VII/VIII Complex
图14.上外侧途径中，距离横窦及乙状窦边缘数毫米、平行于静脉窦走形切开硬膜（左图），乙状窦后方的牵引缝线可以往前往外移位、翻转乙状窦，从而获得更大的操作空间（右图）。	Figure 14: The dural incisions for the supralateral route parallel the sigmoid and transverse sinuses. The dural incision is performed a few millimeters away from the edge of the venous sinuses (left image).  The retraction sutures along the sigmoid sinus dura gently mobilize and rotate this sinus anteriorly and laterally in order to expand the lateral aspect of the operative corridor toward the CP angle (right image).
剪开硬膜时，如果出现明显的静脉窦撕裂或者遇到静脉湖，可将一小块肌肉组织缝合于破口以达止血目的，双极电凝破口会使得硬膜边缘进一步回缩，从而导致裂口扩大以及更复杂的问题。	During opening of the dura, if a venous sinus tear is evident or a venous lake is encountered, this laceration or opening into the sinus may be sutured primarily over a small piece of muscle. Bipolar coagulation of the tear usually retracts the dural edges further, increasing the size of the laceration and compounding the problem.
图15.往下往内牵拉小脑显露桥小脑角内位于面听神经束后上方的病变，术前的腰穿放液大大松弛了小脑，使得牵拉变得更容易。	Figure 15: Inframedial cerebellar retraction allows exposure of lesions within the CP angle, superior and posterior to CN’s VII/VIII. The CSF drainage at the beginning of the procedure relaxes the cerebellum and substantially simplifies this step.
剪取一小块比棉片稍大的橡胶手套作为缓冲垫，放置于小脑表面与棉片之间以避免操作时棉片与脑组织产生摩擦。	A piece of glove (cut slightly larger than the cottonoid) acts as a rubber dam and protects the cerebellar hemisphere from potential injury caused by friction from the cottonoid’s surface while “going around” the hemisphere.
棉片是往岩骨这一侧移动的，而且方向平行于岩上窦。	I advance the cottonoid parallel to the junction (groove) of the tentorium and petrous apex, toward the petrous side.
识别岩幕交界有利于防止：	Identification of the petro-tentorial junction prevents
1. 意外显露和损伤小脑天幕面的桥静脉；	an unintentional exposure (and resultant tear and bleeding) of the supracerebellar bridging veins superiorly, and
2. 平行于面听神经束方向的牵拉引起听力损害。	a retraction vector directly parallel to the CN VII/VIII complex, which would place the patient’s hearing at risk.
使用吸引器动态牵拉小脑来选择性地暴露三叉神经根脑干端区域，因而不需要僵硬的自动牵开器，也不需要牺牲岩上静脉。	Strategic placement of the suction apparatus will allow dynamic retraction of the lateral hemisphere and selective exposure of the operative field at the level of CN V’s root entry zone, obviating a need to employ fixed rigid retractors and to sacrifice the superior petrosal vein.
下外侧途径：适用于面听神经束前、下方的病变	The Infralateral Route for Lesions Anterior and Inferior to the CN's VII/VIII Complex
平行乙状窦与枕骨大孔平面剪开硬膜，丝线牵开切缘使其紧贴骨缘，上文描述的技术这里同样适用。	The dura is incised parallel to the sigmoid sinus and the floor of the posterior fossa. The edges of the dura are tacked up against the craniotomy margins using three silk sutures, and the same techniques are applied as mentioned above in the section related to the supralateral route.
图16.往上、往内牵拉小脑，此处依然可见作为缓冲垫的橡胶手套。	Figure 16: Supramedial cerebellar retraction: A piece of glove (cut slightly larger than the cottonoid patty) acts as a rubber dam.
随着分离的深入，橡胶垫可以自由地在小脑表面滑行（上图），免于后者直接接触粗糙的棉片。	It protects the cerebellar hemisphere against the rough surface of the cottonoid as the rubber dam slides over the cerebellum while dissection is continued to expose the cerebellopontine angle (left image).
随后辨认岩骨与后颅窝底（P，下图术中照）的移行处，朝着后组颅神经方向逐步在橡胶垫上推进棉片。	I identify the junction of the petrous bone and the floor of posterior fossa (P, right intraoperative image) and advance the cottonoid over the rubber dam near the turn of the petrous bone toward the lower cranial nerves.
分离时，吸引器动态移位小脑，此时，牵拉的方向平行于舌咽神经。	The vector of retraction is parallel to CN IX. The shaft of the suction apparatus is used to mobilize the cerebellar hemisphere in a dynamic fashion during the dissection process.
为了减小对颅神经及小脑的损伤，建议锐性分离桥小脑角下部分的蛛网膜。	Along with generous sharp dissection of the regional arachnoid membranes within the inferior CP angle, this maneuver minimizes the risk of cranial nerve and cerebellar injury.
若术者不能早期识别岩幕交界（上外侧途径）或岩骨－后颅窝底交界处（下外侧途径），可能会迷失方向、产生困惑。	The operator can easily get disoriented and early identification of petrous-tentorial junction (supralateral route) and petrous-posterior fossa floor junction (infralateral route) avoids any surprise or confusion.
图17.硬膜缝合。	Figure 17: Dural closure
硬膜边缘应当对合良好。	The dura is approximated primarily.
对于微血管减压这类手术，术后颅压升高少见，术中并不需水密缝合硬膜，术后脑脊液漏的发生概率也很低。	I do not perform a watertight dural closure and have experienced a very low rate of CSF leak for microvascular decompression operations. These procedures are pristine and associated with a small risk of increased CSF pressures postoperatively.
但是肿瘤手术时必须水密缝合硬膜，乳突气房用骨蜡里三层外三层彻底封闭，然后回纳骨瓣或者使用甲基丙烯酸甲酯塑形颅骨，最后分层缝合肌层和皮瓣。	However, a watertight dural closure is mandatory for operations involving resection of tumors. Mastoid air cells are rewaxed thoroughly (“wax in, wax out”), and the bone flap is replaced or a methyl methacrylate cranioplasty is performed. The muscle and scalp are closed in anatomical layers.
术后管理	Postoperative Considerations
术后当晚患者送ICU监护，随后转回普通病房，数天后便可出院。	After surgery, patients are usually admitted to the ICU for an overnight stay for observation and then transferred to the regular ward for a couple of days before they can be discharged home.
术后加强观察患者的血流动力学变化、神经功能状态与伤口愈合情况。	Special attention should be paid to hemodynamic parameters, the neurologic examination, and wound care.
使用激素能够预防无菌性脑膜炎，同时也能够减轻头痛、恶心等不适。	Steroids are administered to prevent aseptic meningitis and minimize postoperative nausea and headaches.
偶尔会有患者出现迟发性面瘫和听力丧失，尤其是面神经减压和表皮样囊肿切除术后，多数为暂时性并且对地塞米松治疗反应良好，疗程1周，期间剂量递减。	Occasionally, delayed facial palsy and hearing loss may occur, especially after MVD for hemifacial spasm and resection of epidermoid tumors. These deficits are most often temporary and respond well to a tapered dose of dexamethasone of 1 week in duration.
拓宽手术通道的其他补充：小脑幕切开	Other Considerations to Expand the Operative Corridor:  The Transtentorial Route
通过联合乙状窦后和小脑上入路显露小脑幕，随后将其广泛切开，此时腹外侧岩斜区、颞底后份（即海马旁回后份）及中颅底便一览无遗，因此延伸至中颅底的后颅窝肿瘤可获得一期切除，从而免去二期的幕上手术。	The retromastoid and supracerebellar routes may be combined to expose the tentorium. A wide excision of the tentorium would allow access to the ventrolateral petroclival area and posterior basal temporal lobe (posterior parahippocampus) as well as middle fossa floor. Moreover, this pathway would facilitate resection of posterior fossa tumors extending into the middle fossa in one stage while avoiding a second operation through the supratentorial corridor.
这将在《小脑上入路》一章中详细介绍。	I will discuss these modifications in the chapter related to supracerebellar craniotomy.
乙状窦后入路的其他类型切口	Alternative Incisions for Retromastoid Craniotomy
图18.直线形切口广泛用于微血管减压术以及切除小的桥小脑角肿瘤，此切口的1/3位于横窦上方，2/3位于下方，图中这条小的水平交叉线大致为横窦的位置。	Figure 18: The linear incision is most commonly used for microvascular decompression surgery and exposing small CP angle tumors.  The linear incision is marked 1/3 above and 2/3 below the transverse sinus.  The approximate location of the transverse sinus is demonstrated using the short crossing line.
· 扩大乙状窦后入路是处理桥小脑角病变的灵活实用途径，使用该入路有时可以避免更大范围的岩骨切除。	The extended retromastoid craniotomy is the flexible workhorse approach for resection of lesions within the CP angle.This approach can sometimes obviate the need for more involved petrosal osteotomies.
· 为了防止损伤前庭蜗神经，只能平行于三叉神经或者舌咽神经的方向牵拉小脑。	The cerebellum should be retracted only parallel to the direction of CN’s V and IX to avoid direct traction on CN VIII.
锐性分离蛛网膜、吸引器动态牵拉小脑可以降低颅神经损害风险。	Sharp arachnoid dissection and strategic dynamic cerebellar retraction will facilitate cerebellar mobilization without placing the cranial nerves at risk.
旁正中小脑上入路开颅术	Paramedian Supracerebellar Craniotomy
旁正中小脑上入路开颅是小脑上入路开颅的一个变种，和后正中小脑上入路开颅有许多共同点。	A variation of the supracerebellar craniotomy is the paramedian supracerebellar craniotomy, which has some features in common with the midline supracerebellar craniotomy.
它们是小脑上入路开颅的两个变种，所以在这两章中有部分内容是重复的。	Because these procedures are two variations of the supracerebellar craniotomy, some information is repeated in these two chapters.
小脑上入路开颅是神经外科中最未充分利用的入路之一。	The supracerebellar craniotomy is one of the most underutilized approaches in neurosurgery.
由于其通路较长，所以在灵活性上尚需探索。	Its flexibility as a far-reaching corridor deserves much more exploration.
中线两侧枕下小脑上入路传统设计用于暴露松果体区的肿瘤。	The midline bilateral suboccipital supracerebellar route is traditionally designed for exposing pineal region tumors.
其局限性包括：侧方或者向下的视野分别受小脑幕角度和小脑山顶尖部的局限；不可避免地会损伤中线部位几乎所有小脑蚓部桥静脉，不无风险。	The limitations of this approach include limited lateral or inferior visualization caused by the angle of the tentorium and the obstructive apex of the culmen, respectively. Almost all midline bridging vermian veins are invariably sacrificed, and this maneuver is not without risks.
最近对于大型中线松果体区肿瘤，笔者停用了中线两侧的小脑上入路，而偏好左侧旁正中小脑上入路来弥补上述缺点。	I recently abandoned the midline bilateral supracerebellar route in favor of the unilateral paramedian alternative even for accessing large midline pineal region tumors. I prefer the left-sided paramedian supracerebellar approach to avoid the dominant transverse sinus.
小脑外侧或者菱形叶的路径比经过小脑山顶的视野更直接、更平缓，并且旁正中入路可以避开大部分中线区蚓静脉。	In this approach, the trajectory over the lateral cerebellum or the quadrangular lobule is more direct and less steep versus the route over the apex of the culmen. The use of the paramedian corridor allows the surgeon to spare most of the midline vermian veins.
旁正中入路开颅优于中线枕下开颅术，类似于额外侧或翼点入路优于双额冠开颅术切除嗅沟脑膜瘤。	I believe the advantages of the paramedian versus a midline suboccipital craniotomy are similar to those of a frontolateral or pterional craniotomy versus a bifrontal craniotomy for resection of large olfactory groove meningiomas.
本章主要讨论旁正中小脑上入路。该入路可显露松果体、中脑后外侧、第三脑室后部和颞叶后部底面。	In this chapter, I focus on the paramedian supracerebellar approach that provides all of the necessary operative access to the pineal, posterolateral mesencephalon, posterior third ventricle, and the posterior basal temporal lobe.
传统的中线小脑上入路会用单独一个章节来讨论。	The traditional midline supracerebellar approach  is described in its own dedicated chapter.
图1. 旁正中小脑上入路比中线入路有很多优势：①损伤更小，多数不会威胁到右侧优势的横窦和窦汇；②只在一侧小脑半球进行操作；③多能保护小脑蚓部桥静脉；④经小脑外侧的视线倾斜度更低，可为显露肿瘤下极提供更低的视线。	Figure 1: The paramedian supracerebellar approach has numerous advantages over the midline approach: 1) the craniotomy is less invasive and does not place the frequently more dominant right transverse sinus and torcula at risk, 2) only one cerebellar hemisphere is manipulated, 3) the vermian bridging veins are often protected, and 4) the lower slope of the lateral cerebellum provides a more inferior trajectory to the inferior pole of the tumor.
再次手术可以通过对侧完整的小脑上入路完成。	Repeat surgery may be performed through the intact contralateral supracerebellar route.
小脑上入路用于暴露松果体区肿瘤，比如生殖细胞瘤、松果体母细胞瘤、星形细胞瘤和其他罕见的病变如脑膜瘤、表皮样瘤、纤维性星形细胞瘤等。	The supracerebellar approach is useful for exposing pineal region tumors such as germ cell tumors, pineoblastomas, astrocytomas, and other rare lesions such as meningiomas, epidermoid tumors, and pilocytic astrocytomas.
重要的是，该入路灵活多变，由于在丘脑枕操作轻柔，病人耐受良好，是笔者行三脑室后部肿瘤切除时的首选。	Importantly, this is an alternative route and my preferred approach for resection of posterior third ventricular tumors because gentle manipulation of the pulvinar is well tolerated by patients.
血管性病变如天幕的动静脉漏或动静脉畸形同样可以采用该入路。	Vascular lesions such as tentorial arteriovenous fistulae and malformations are also amenable to this approach.
其它中脑后外侧的脑实质内病变，如海绵状血管瘤和毛细胞型星形细胞瘤，以及小脑上动脉远端动脉瘤等也可以采用此入路。	Other intraparenchymal posterolateral mesencephalic lesions such as cavernous malformations and pilocytic astrocytomas may be reached through this route. Distal superior cerebellar artery aneurysms may also be accessed.
图2. 松果体区(左图)及中脑后外侧(右图)大型病变可以很容易通过小脑上入路显露。	Figure 2: Large lesions in the pineal region (left image) and posterolateral mesencephalon (right image) can be readily exposed through the paramedian supracerebellar route.
旁正中小脑上入路中的经小脑幕扩展是在经典入路基础上的创新。	The transtentorial extension of the paramedian supracerebellar operative corridor is innovative.
经过小脑上的空间打开小脑幕，可以让笔者们切除延伸到小脑幕幕上的部分岩尖脑膜瘤，避免了经颞下入路的二次手术。	Wide sectioning of the tentorium through the supracerebellar space allows removal of the supratentorial extension of petrous apex meningiomas and avoids subjecting the patient to a second-stage subtemporal surgery.
海马后部的海绵状血管瘤、动静脉畸形、星形细胞瘤和转移瘤可以通过这种入路切除。	Posterior hippocampal cavernous malformations, arteriovenous malformations, astrocytomas, and metastasis may be resected through this approach.
此入路无需采用颞下入路而牵拉颞叶，是切除中线处天幕脑膜瘤的理想入路。	This route is ideal for excising medial tentorial meningiomas while obviating the need for temporal lobe retraction to reach the medial tentorium through the subtemporal pathway.
因此，幕下开颅术可以通过牵拉天幕从而完全地切除幕上肿瘤。	Therefore, the transtentorial modification may be used to resect a completely supratentorial tumor through an infratentorial craniotomy.
图3. 跨天幕的岩尖脑膜瘤(上图)和近中线天幕脑膜瘤(下图)可以通过旁正中小脑上经天幕入路单次手术切除。	Figure 3: Transtentorial petrous apex meningiomas (upper images) and medial tentorial meningiomas (lower images) may be resected with a single-stage surgery using the paramedian supracerebellar transtentorial route.
术前MR成像可以显示肿瘤范围，并以此来衡量是否需要联合入路或者需要经天幕入路。	Preoperative magnetic resonance images will disclose the extent of the tumor and the need for a combined or transtentorial corridor.
梗阻性脑积水需要显露Keen点或者术前行脑室额角穿刺引流。	Obstructive hydrocephalus requires preparation of the Keen’s point or a preoperative frontal ventriculostomy.
利用旁正中入路的切口可以很容易地显露Keen点的骨孔。	The paramedian linear incision can readily uncover the bony area corresponding to the burr hole for the Keen’s point.
生殖细胞肿瘤需要通过血清或者脑脊液进行排除。	Germ cell tumors should be excluded using serum and cerebrospinal fluid markers.
在本操作中笔者会将病人调整为改良的公园长椅位。	I use the modified park-bench position for patients during this procedure.
并且会通过腰大池引流脑脊液进一步降低颅内压，为小脑的活动提供更大的空间。	Cerebrospinal fluid drainage through the lumbar drain (in the absence of obstructive hydrocephalus) provides further decompression for mobilization of the cerebellum.
横窦和乙状窦有解剖变异，术前明确其解剖走行可以提高颅骨切开时的安全性。	The transverse and sigmoid sinuses may have slightly variable courses and their preoperative study can enhance the safety of the craniotomy.
有些因素虽然不是小脑上入路禁忌症，但是可以使操作的难度增加，比如，天幕斜度较大以及肥胖患者的脖子太短等。	Factors such as a steep tentorial angle and a very obese patient with a short neck, although not contraindications to the use of the supracerebellar route, can make the operation more challenging.
在上述情况下，使病人屈颈可以改善经小脑上入路导致的手术视角困难，并且建议将病人放置在坐位。	In these situations, the patient’s neck flexion may ameliorate the difficult working angles over the cerebellum, and it is recommended that the patient be placed in the sitting position.
MRI可以明确深静脉结构(Galen静脉、基底静脉、大脑内静脉和直窦) 和手术途径及肿瘤之间的关系。	Magnetic resonance images can provide critical information about the relationship of the deep venous structures (vein of Galen, basal vein of Rosenthal, internal cerebral veins, and straight sinus) to the operative trajectory and tumor.
偶尔，后部丘脑和小脑蚓部肿瘤类似松果体区占位，逐渐向后推移间脑引流静脉，这种情况是小脑上入路的潜在禁忌。	Occasionally, posterior thalamic and vermian tumors mimic primary pineal region masses and displace the diencephalic veins posteriorly; this configuration is a potential contraindication for use of the supracerebellar approach.
另外，肿瘤对周围重要神经结构的浸润程度 (如中脑、丘脑) 必须在手术之前明确。	The degree of tumor infiltration through the surrounding critical neural structures (e.g., midbrain, thalamus) must be studied before surgery.
图4. 松果体区入路的相关解剖	Figure 4: The regional anatomy for approaching the pineal region is shown.
注意颞叶底部后方及顶叶和松果体区的关系(A).	Note the relationship of the posterior basal temporal lobe and occipital lobe to the pineal area (A).
经小脑上入路切开天幕后可以显露幕上区域。	These supratentorial regions become available after transection of the tentorium through the supracerebellar route.
小脑上表面 (B) 和中脑后部(C and D)。	The surface anatomy of the cerebellum (B) and posterior diencephalon (C and D) are shown.
动脉(E)和静脉(F) 解剖 (图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权).	The vascular arterial (E) and venous (F) anatomy are evident (E)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图5. 经中线小脑上入路显露松果体区的脑血管放大图。	Figure 5: Higher magnified images of the cerebrovascular anatomy within the pineal region through the paramedian supracerebellar approach are shown.
胼胝体压部在Galen静脉的前方。	The splenium is anterior to the vein of Galen.
当术者视线随着小脑幕的走行进入到松果体区，他已经不自主的在Galen静脉周围操作。	As the operator follows the contours of the tentorium toward the pineal region, he or she may be led to inadvertently dissect around the vein of Galen.
术者必须要认识到这种错误并主动将手术视线向下调整到松果体区。	This error must be avoided and the operative trajectory readjusted inferiorly toward the pineal region.
注意通过侧方入路所看到的松果体区概貌（E）(图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权)	Note the generous view of the pineal region through the lateral trajectory (E)(Images courtesy of Rhoton, AL).
图6. 相对于后正中入路(左图)，旁正中小脑上入路(右图)可以避开几乎所有的小脑蚓部桥静脉。	Figure 6: Compared with the midline approach (left image), the paramedian supracerebellar approach (right image) avoids most of the midline vermian bridging veins.
图7. 后正中入路(左图)的显露取决于对山顶的牵拉，而旁正中入路(右图)经过的是较低位的外侧小脑。	Figure 7: The midline route (left image) depends upon retraction of the culmen, whereas the paramedian route (right image) reaches over the more inferiorly situated lateral cerebellum.
第IV脑神经位于手术区域的下缘。	Cranial nerve IV is situated at the lower edge of the dissection field.
图8. 通过旁正中枕下开颅切除部分左侧小脑幕，显露环池，颞叶底面后部及相关动脉的解剖(B,C,D)。	Figure 8: Sectioning a window of the left tentorium through a paramedian supracerebellar craniotomy exposes the posterior ambien cisterns, basal temporal lobe, and the relevant arterial anatomy (B, C, and D).
注意通过此入路显示的海马旁回后部和大脑后动脉远端分支(图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权)	Note the generous exposure of the posterior parahippocampus and distal posterior cerebral artery branches through this route (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
旁正中小脑上入路开颅	PARAMEDIAN SUPRACEREBELLAR CRANIOTOMY
如上所述，笔者喜欢将病人摆放为改良的公园长椅位，用旁正中小脑上入路到达松果体、中脑后外侧和第三脑室后部。	As stated previously, I prefer to use the paramedian supracerebellar approach to the pineal, posterolateral mesencephalon, posterior third ventricular and posterior basal temporal territories with the patient placed in a modified park-bench position.
图9. 左侧的小脑上入路能保护窦汇以及通常为右侧优势的直窦和横窦。	Figure 9: The left-sided suboccipital craniotomy protects the torcula and the often more dominant right-sided veins and dural sinuses, including the transverse sinus.
术中使用头颅夹使病人曲颈并使头部向地面弯曲15-20度。	A skull clamp is used with the patient’s neck flexed and head turned slightly (15-20 degrees) toward the floor.
上图中肿瘤位置标注了X。	The location of the tumor is marked with X on the upper image.
病人一侧肩膀向前远离手术区。	The patient’s ipsilateral shoulder is allowed to fall forward and is taped away from the surgeon’s working zone.
术中可能会通过神经导航确定中线以及横窦和乙状窦的位置。	Intraoperative neuronavigation may be used to identify the location of the midline as well as the transverse and sigmoid sinuses.
旁正中垂直切口位于枕状隆突和乳突连线中点。	A paramedian vertical linear incision is made halfway between the inion and the mastoid groove.
该切口向横窦上方扩展1/3，向下方扩展2/3，长度大约7-8cm。	This incision extends one-third above and two-thirds below the transverse sinus and is about 7–8 cm in length.
注意Keen点（左下图剪头所示）在切口上缘。	Note the Keen’s point (arrow, lower left image) is within the upper edge of the incision.
图10. 在横窦下缘钻一个小孔，距离中线和窦汇大约2cm。	Figure 10: A single burr hole is made at the inferior edge of the transverse sinus, approximately 2 cm lateral to the midline and torcula.
在暴露整个横窦的时候掀开一个小骨瓣为之后的操作留下空间。	A small bone flap is elevated while the entire width of the transverse sinus is exposed to allow room for later rostral mobilization of this sinus.
以窦为基础单独打开硬脑膜。	The dura is opened as a single curved flap based on the sinus.
在天幕后面放上两根缝线来轻微地拉动横窦对于扩展小脑上入路的空间是极其有益的。	Two retraction sutures are placed along the posterior aspect of the tentorium to mobilize and gently rotate the transverse sinus superiorly to expand the operative space through the supracerebellar corridor.
脑脊液通过腰大池或者脑室进行缓慢引流能够使一侧小脑半球松弛。	Gradual release of cerebrospinal fluid through the lumbar drain or ventriculostomy catheter allows gentle caudal mobilization of the lateral cerebellar hemisphere.
图11. 传统颅骨和硬脑膜切开方法限制了医生的工作角度，同样限制了小脑上入路的显露空间(上图)。	Figure 11: Traditional bone removal and dural opening restrict the working angles of the surgeon and limit the corridor within the supracerebellar space (top image).
放置固定牵开器切开小脑幕，尽管可以抬起横窦，但是不能明显扩大手术视野。	Placement of a fixed retractor on the tentorium, despite skeletonization of the sinuses, does not significantly improve the operative corridor.
事实上，它可能还会影响到手术的工作角度(中图)。	In fact, it may interfere with the working angles of the instruments (middle image).
小脑幕上缝线并牵拉、抬起小脑幕，并可以抬起横窦，扩大手术视角(下图)。	The retraction sutures anchored on the tentorium elevate the tentorium, mobilize/rotate the transverse sinus, and expand the operative corridor (bottom image).
图12. 一两条中线旁的中线小脑蚓部桥静脉被牺牲。	Figure 12: One or two paramedian bridging veins may have to be sacrificed.
大的中线旁静脉被保留完好。	Large midline bridging veins are left intact.
注意天幕后的缝线。	Note the retraction sutures placed through the posterior tentorium.
这些缝线能够轻柔地拉动横窦。	These sutures gently rotate and mobilize the transverse sinuses superiorly.
超声多普勒能够确认窦是否开放并且确认移动静脉窦的安全程度。	Microdoppler ultrasonography can confirm patency of the sinus and gauge the safe degree of retraction on the sinus.
图13. 撕开覆盖中中脑背外侧的蛛网膜颗粒能够将小脑向下移动并向中线方向打开脑池。	Figure 13: Dissection of the arachnoid membranes over the medial dorsolateral mesencephalon will mobilize the cerebellum downward and open the corridor toward the midline.
第IV对颅神经是外侧角暴露的证据。	Cranial nerve IV is evident in the inferolateral corner of the exposure.
图14. 一旦打开肿瘤表面蛛网膜，就可以进行显微操作切除肿瘤。	Figure 14: Upon opening the arachnoid membranes over the tumor, the surgeon can begin microsurgical removal of the tumor.
这种“斜线”入路是有好处的，因为小脑天幕面沿着前内侧角和斜坡向下向外。	This “cross court” trajectory is beneficial since the tentorial surface of the cerebellum is highest along its anteromedial apex and slopes down laterally.
所以，对于向下扩展的巨大松果体区肿瘤，一侧旁正中入路比中线入路提供更多中线后方和中脑后外侧的视野。	Therefore, the lateral paramedian operative corridor provides a more inferior trajectory to the posterior midline and posterolateral mesencephalon as compared with the midline trajectory to access the inferior extension of large pineal region tumors.
通过吸引器让小脑动态回缩就能够暴露和切除肿瘤下部，而不需要固定牵拉。	Dynamic retraction of the cerebellum using the suction apparatus allows exposure and resection of the inferior extent of the tumor without the use of fixed retractors.
吸引器能够使扩展的视野可控性更强，同时牵拉的话还可能损伤深部结构。	The suction apparatus allows a more controlled expanded view of the working zone at the exact location of the dissection, whereas the wide blade of the retractor may at times compromise the deep exposure.
小脑上经天幕入路	SUPRACEREBELLAR TRANSTENTORIAL APPROACH
这个入路的改良同样可以在病人公园长椅位置时操作。	This modification of the approach can also be performed with the patient in the park-bench position.
图15. 注意该入路对切除天幕内侧肿瘤时的重要性。	Figure 15: Note the role of this route for resection of medial tentorial tumors.
必须沿着切迹外侧缘保护第IV对颅神经（插图）。	Cranial nerve IV must be protected along the lateral edge of the incisura during tentorial transection (inset image).
沿着红色虚线的切口会破坏该神经，只有沿着黑色虚线的切口才是正确的。	Incision along the red hashed line will sacrifice the nerve—incision along the black hashed line is appropriate.
或者对于颞叶基底部后部的脑实质内病变，”T”字形的天幕切口也是可以的。	Alternatively, a “T” shaped incision may be made within the tentorium for intraparenchymal lesions within the posterior basal temporal lobe.
图16. 在分离肿瘤的时候，天幕切口处脑干后部以及周围神经血管的早期暴露可以使它们得到更好的保护，不会受到肿瘤压迫或者手术区出血污染的影响。	Figure 16: Early exposure of the posterior brainstem and surrounding neurovascular structures at the tentorial incisura allows for their protection by microdissection away from the tumor before significant tumor debulking is performed and the surgical field is obscured by bleeding.
轴外肿瘤可以在早期就电凝掉天幕下表面的血管。	Extra-axial tumors can be devascularized early in surgery through cauterization of the undersurface of the tentorium.
图17. 在确认和保护滑车神经的时候沿着天幕的前缘从岩骨嵴切到中线。	Figure 17: A generous portion of the tentorium is then incised from the petrous ridge to the midline while identifying and preserving the trochlear nerve along the entire anterior edge of the tentorium.
引流枕叶和天幕上面的奇静脉可能会牺牲。	Occasional bridging veins draining the occipital lobe and entering the superior aspect of the tentorium may be sacrificed.
内侧天幕切口应该保留直窦。	The medial tentorial cut should preserve the straight sinus and its tributaries.
要保留静脉湖，天幕上的静脉出血用凝血明胶海绵按压。	Venous lakes may be present and venous bleeding through the leaflets of the tentorium should be controlled using thrombin soaked gelfoam packing.
双凝电极用于天幕边缘的出血。	Bipolar cauterization will exacerbate the bleeding by shrinking and tearing the tentorial edges.
上述的天幕切法会进一步使肿瘤去血管化，造成肿瘤相对缺血变小从而在显微操作下将肿瘤从周围皮质中取出。	Sectioning of the tentorium as described above will further devascularize the tumor and allow a relatively bloodless field to debulk the tumor and microsurgically mobilize it from the surrounding cortex.
图18. 切除天幕为枕叶和后／内颞叶创造了比较宽的入路。	Figure 18: This tentorial resection creates a wide corridor to the basal occipital and posterior/medial temporal regions.
该区域的轴内肿瘤可用类似方法切除。	An intra-axial tumor in this region can be similarly resected.
硬脑膜必须以水密式缝合的方式的关闭，因为脑脊液漏是后颅窝肿瘤术后的一个严重风险。	The dura must be closed in a watertight fashion because the occurrence of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid fistulae is a significant risk after tumor operations within the posterior fossa.
相对于同种异体移植物，笔者更喜欢使用一块自体骨膜移植重建硬脑膜缺损。	I prefer to avoid using an allograft to reconstruct the dural defect and instead use a piece of pericranial autograft.
骨质缺损可以使用颅骨板取代。	The bone may be replaced using cranial plates.
笔者会尽量避免缝合颈深部肌肉时张力过大，以减少肌肉绞窄坏死以及术后不自主的颈部疼痛，因为这个操作会导致肌肉坏死和不受控制的术后疼痛。	I avoid placing the deep neck muscles under significant tension and minimize their strangulation by deep sutures to protect the patient from muscle necrosis and uncontrolled postoperative pain.
颈部肌肉的缝合需要轻轻拉拢，而颈部筋膜的缝合需要严密的不透水缝合。	The neck muscles are gently approximated. The fascia is closed in a watertight fashion.
手术后病人在重症监护室观察1、2天，然后转移到病房。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit for a day or two after surgery and then transferred to the ward.
推荐采用类固醇预防无菌性脑膜炎。	Steroids are administered prophylactically to minimize the risk of aseptic meningitis.
如果术前发生脑积水并进行了脑室外引流。在手术中应该保留植入的导管，手术后拔管。	If preoperative hydrocephalus was present and a ventricular catheter was implanted intraoperatively, this catheter should be left in place during surgery and weaned off after surgery.
暴力牵拉小脑会导致术后水肿。	Aggressive retraction of the cerebellum can lead to retraction edema.
这可以在影像中看到，也会逐渐进展为症状性颅后窝高压并需要手术减压。	This can be seen on postoperative imaging and can ultimately cause symptomatic posterior fossa tension and a need for decompression.
因此，应该小心谨慎的进行硬脑膜关闭和骨瓣复位。	Therefore, caution should be exercised during dural closure and bone flap replacement.
如果出现脑肿胀，硬脑膜应该减张缝合，去除骨瓣。	If the brain appears swollen, the dural closure should not cause more tension and the bone flap should not be replaced.
这种脑肿胀可能由于横窦局部血栓形成和小脑蚓部静脉损伤引起。	This brain swelling can be potentially compounded by partial transverse sinus thrombosis and paravermian vein sacrifice.
· 与后正中枕下小脑上入路相比，旁正中小脑上入路更微创，并且为松果体区大型肿瘤切除提供足够的显露，同时对于两侧硬膜静脉窦和小脑半球的风险更低。	Compared with the bilateral midline suboccipital supracerebellar approach, the paramedian supracerebellar approach is less invasive and provides adequate exposure for resection of large pineal region tumors.The paramedian alternative places bilateral dural venous structures and cerebellar hemispheres at less risk.
· 小脑幕的牵拉、缝合可以抬起横窦，扩大小脑上手术的通道。	The use of tentorial retraction sutures to rotate and elevate the transverse sinuses expands the supracerebellar operative corridor.
经膜帆入路开颅术	Telovelar Approach
四脑室病变被小脑蚓部覆盖，可以采用两种手术入路来显露：膜帆入路和经蚓部入路。	Lesions of the fourth ventricle are covered by the cerebellar vermis and may be exposed through either of two operative corridors:  The telovelar and transvermian routes.
经蚓部入路特征性的操作即切开下蚓部，常用于四脑室嘴侧并没有向外侧隐窝生长的较大病变。	The transvermian approach which involves transecting the inferior vermis is typically used for large lesions that occupy the rostral fourth ventricle and do not extend into the lateral recesses.
这一入路的弊端是术野显露局限在中线区域，并且必须切开蚓部。	The disadvantages of this approach are that the exposure is limited to midline lesions and the vermis must be divided.
蚓部劈开综合征表现为眼球震颤、步态紊乱、头颈摆动、躯干共济失调、平衡紊乱。	Vermian split syndrome manifests with nystagmus, gait disturbance, oscillation of the head and neck, truncal ataxia, and disturbance in equilibrium.
除此之外，儿童患者劈开蚓部可能会出现小脑性缄默征。	In addition, pediatric patients may suffer from cerebellar mutism.
膜帆入路经自然平面进入，因此没有破坏性。	The telovelar approach uses natural planes and therefore is less destructive.
肿瘤位于Luschka孔时也可经膜帆入路显露；切除 C1椎板可获得更灵活的从下至上的工作角度来显露四脑室嘴侧的病变。	Lesions within the foramen of Luschka are reachable, and the rostral extent of the intraventricular exposure can be expanded by more flexible inferior-to-superior working angles through a C1 laminectomy.
采用这一操作后的四脑室显露与经蚓部入路不分伯仲。它同样能提供脑室头尾全长从闩部到导水管的全部显露，	This maneuver can lead to ventricular exposure that is on par with the transvermian approach, providing a generous exposure of the entire rostrocaudal length of the ventricle from the obex to the aqueduct.
而且，经膜帆入路还能提供到达Luschka孔外侧隐窝和上外侧隐窝的更宽广的视野。	Moreover, the telovelar route provides a more expanded view of the lateral and supralateral recesses of the foramen of Luschka.
图1：比较经蚓部入路（A、B），蚓部下1/3被切开。	Figure 1: Comparison of the transvermian approach (A and B) that involves transection of the inferior one-third of the vermis.
注意到经膜帆入路可获得相同的显露。	Note the similar exposure through the telovelar approach (C and D).
（C、D）向上牵拉小脑扁桃体显露脉络膜、下髓帆和两侧的外侧隐窝（C）。	The tonsils have been retracted superolaterally to expose the tela choroidea, inferior medullary velum, and both lateral recesses (C).
膜帆入路提供了外侧隐窝更宽广的视野。（图片来自于AL Rhoton, Jr授权）	The telovelar route affords more expanded views of the lateral recesses (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr)
因为这些原因，笔者在处理所有四脑室病变时已经不再使用经蚓部入路，而更愿意选择膜帆入路。	For these reasons, I have abandoned the transvermian route in favor of the telovelar approach for reaching all fourth ventricular lesions.
本章描述了膜帆入路的技术要点。	This chapter describes the technical nuances for the telovelar route.
图2：四脑室底的重要结构。	Figure 2: Functional organization of the fourth ventricular floor.
四脑室底的操作与面瘫、复视、吞咽和通气障碍的高风险密切相关（图片来自于AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	Manipulation of the floor is associated with a high risk of facial weakness, diplopia, and swallowing and ventilatory dysfunction (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
症状不断进展的病变是手术切除的适应症。	Lesions with progressive symptoms are candidates for resective surgery.
室管膜瘤可导致脑干压迫症，瘤内出血会导致急性神经功能恶化。	Ependymomas may lead to symptomatic brainstem compression and their intratumoral hemorrhage may cause acute neurologic deterioration.
四脑室受累的病变包括室管膜瘤、髓母细胞瘤、转移瘤、外生性脑干肿瘤、脉络丛乳突状瘤、海绵状血管瘤和动静脉畸形。	Lesions affecting the fourth ventricle include ependymomas, medulloblastomas, hemangioblastomas, metastases, exophytic brainstem tumors, choroid plexus papillomas, cavernous malformations, and arteriovenous malformations.
因为四脑室底功能复杂多样，切除四脑室底的下层病变可能会导致多组颅神经麻痹，因此首先考虑的是如何选择合适的病例。	Because of the eloquence of the fourth ventricular floor, various cranial nerve palsies may occur from resection of the underlying pathology affecting the floor. Appropriate patient selection is paramount.
图3：四脑室室管膜瘤部分钙化/强化（上方图像）。	Figure 3: Fourth ventricular ependymoma with partial enhancement/calcification (upper images).
肿瘤和四脑室底的紧密关系决定是否在四脑室底留一薄片肿瘤组织。	The close relationship of this tumor to the floor mandates radical subtotal resection while leaving a small piece of the tumor on the floor.
桥脑海绵状血管瘤（下方图像）要求在电生理监测面神经核之下切除占位。	Pontine cavernous malformations (lower images) demand mapping of the facial nucleus for its resection.
两个病例均采用膜帆入路。	Both lesions were handled through the telovelar route.
术前评估	Preoperative Considerations
术前MRI检查可提供肿瘤在四脑室嘴侧扩展的重要信息，这决定膜帆入路是否需要联合微小的蚓部切开或者C1椎板切开，并以此达到肿瘤上极的目的。	The preoperative magnetic resonance images (MRI) convey important information about the rostral extent of the lesion and the need for a small caudal vermian split or C1 laminectomy in conjunction with the telovelar approach to reach the superior pole of the tumor.
评估肿瘤对四脑室底的侵犯和术前计划积极的次全切除方案十分重要，这样术者就可以避免不必要的术中尝试来切除侵犯四脑室底的肿瘤。	It is important to evaluate the invasion of the ventricular floor by the tumor and plan a subtotal radical resection preoperatively so the surgeon can avoid any temptation during surgery to manipulate the tumor that invades the floor.
积极切除侵犯四脑室底的肿瘤总是与高致残率及术后吞咽通气障碍的重大风险相关，此类患者术后都需要胃造瘘和气管切开维持生命。	Aggressive dissection of the tumor invading the floor is associated with high morbidity and significant risks of postoperative swallowing and ventilation dysfunction that would require both a gastrostomy and tracheostomy.
笔者强烈反对肿瘤切除过程中对四脑室底的任何操作，黏连的薄片肿瘤应该保留在四脑室底。	I strongly advise against any manipulation of the floor during tumor resection, and a sheet of adherent tumor should be left on the floor.
然而，在电生理监测下切除症状性软膜下病变如海绵状血管瘤是可取的。	However, manipulation of the floor through electrophysiologic mapping for resection of symptomatic intraparenchymal lesions such as cavernous malformations is reasonable.
过度肥胖的患者可能无法耐受改良的公园长椅位，	Morbidly obese patients may not tolerate the modified park-bench position.
极端情况下也可考虑坐位并做好全部的准备工作。	In rare circumstances, the sitting position should be considered and preparation for such positioning should be made.
如果后组颅神经功能障碍已经出现，患者术后应该保持插管并在拔管后恢复进食前请耳鼻喉科医生会诊评估。	If lower preoperative cranial nerve dysfunction is present, the patient should remain intubated immediately after surgery and appropriate ENT consultation obtained before extubation and resumption of feeding.
PICA可能被肿瘤包绕，特别是再次手术的患者。	The posterior inferior cerebellar arteries (PICA) may be encased by the tumor, especially if the patient is having a repeat operation.
术前T2W序列能警示术者制定一个保护这些重要血管的次全切计划。	Preoperative imaging (T2-wieghted sequences) can warn the operator to plan a subtotal resection to protect these vital vessels.
术前MRI评估也能显示患者的枕窦，硬膜打开时枕窦可导致大量出血。	Preoperative evaluation of the MRI may demonstrate a patent occipital sinus that could cause brisk bleeding during the dural opening.
出血性占位并发的脑积水可能需要术前侧脑室外引流术。	A hemorrhagic mass with hydrocephalus may require a preoperative external ventricular drain.
在后颅窝极度扩大的占位存在时，积极的幕上引流可能会导致小脑天幕上疝和危及生命的脑干受压。	Aggressive supratentorial ventricular drainage in the face of an acutely expanding large posterior fossa mass may result in upward cerebellar transtentorial herniation and life-threatening brainstem compression.
病变位于脑干实质内时术前应该放置除颤电极。	Lesions occurring within the brainstem parenchyma may necessitate placement of defibrillator pads before surgery.
传统上将四脑室描述成一个帐篷，基底向前，而两边分别在嘴侧和尾侧。	The fourth ventricle is traditionally described as a tent with the floor facing anteriorly and the sides facing rostral and caudal.
四脑室顶的上半由上髓帆和小脑上脚组成，	The superior part of the roof of the ventricle is comprised of the superior medullary velum and superior cerebellar peduncles.
四脑室顶的下半由下髓帆、脉络膜、蚓垂和蚓结节组成。	The inferior part of the roof is comprised of the inferior medullary velum, the tela choroidea, uvula, and nodule.
外侧隐窝开口于桥小脑角。	The lateral recesses are open to the cerebellopontine angle.
此处可见几个与小脑扁桃体相关的重要间隙。	Several important spaces can be seen relative to the tonsils.
小脑谷位于两侧扁桃体内侧面之间，	The vallecula is the space between the medial surfaces of the two tonsils.
小脑延髓裂位于扁桃体前表面和延髓之间。	The cerebellomedullary fissure is defined by the anterior surface of the tonsil and the medulla.
PICA是与此入路关系密切的结构之一。	The PICAs are intimately related to the structures involved in this approach.
PICA绕扁桃体走行，并通过四脑室顶的下半部分。	These arteries travel around the tonsils and through the inferior part of the roof of the ventricle.
然后PICA离开四脑室顶进入小脑半球、扁桃体和蚓部之间的裂隙。	They then turn away from the roof and into the fissures between the hemispheres, tonsils, and vermis.
图4：膜帆入路进入四脑室的基本原则：	Figure 4: Principles of the telovelar approach to the fourth ventricle.
显露小脑延髓裂和扁桃体蚓垂裂隙（A），通过向外侧牵拉小脑扁桃体显露扁桃体蚓垂间隙。	The cerebellomedullary fissure and uvulotonsillar space are exposed (A). The uvulotonsillar space is expanded by retracting the tonsil laterally at the uvulotonsillar fissure.
PICA的双分叉被显露后，识别并保护其内侧干和外侧干（B）。	The bifurcation of PICA is exposed and the medial and lateral trunks can be identified and protected (B).
牵拉蚓垂显露下髓帆（神经钩）（C）。	The uvula is also retracted to reveal the inferior medullary velum (nerve hook) (C).
切开脉络膜后，向两个牵开器施加向上的牵拉，打开四脑室。	A superior vector is added to both retractors to open up the fourth ventricle after division of the tela choroidea.
注意向外侧牵开PICA而不牺牲其分支，下髓帆仍保持完整。	Notice the lateral retraction of the PICA bifurcation without sacrifice of its branches. The inferior medullary velum is still intact.
可见四脑室底和中脑导水管开口（D）。	The aqueduct and floor of the fourth ventricle are visible (D).
切开同侧的下髓帆可获得上外侧隐窝的显露，可以看见并保护位于小脑延髓裂内的下髓帆嘴侧附近的静脉（E）（图片来自于AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	Exposure of the superolateral recess is obtained by dividing the ipsilateral inferior medullary velum. The vein of the cerebellomedullary fissure near the rostral aspect of the inferior medullary velum is visible and preserved (E)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图5：膜帆入路中切开脉络膜和下髓帆的手术步骤图片（图片来自于AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	Figure 5: More images demonstrating the operative steps in the telovelar approach through incising the tela choroidea and inferior medullary velum (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
膜帆入路	TELOVELAR APPROACH
膜帆入路的技术要点是需要切开脉络膜和下髓帆，二者构成四脑室顶的下半部分。	The principle techniques for the telovelar route involve incisions within the tela choroidea and inferior medullary velum, which form the lower half of the roof of the fourth ventricle.
下蚓部可以牵开来显露四脑室。	The lower vermis is retracted to expose the fourth ventricle.
采用标准的枕下中线开颅，典型的骨窗比小脑半球病变的骨窗小，与Chiari畸形减压的开颅相似。	A standard midline suboccipital craniotomy is performed. The craniotomy is typically narrower than the one for hemispheric lesions and somewhat resembles the craniectomy for Chiari decompression.
它显露小脑半球侧面的内四分之一。	It exposes the medial quarter to half of the hemispheres laterally.
在此入路中，横窦没有必要显露。	The transverse sinuses do not need to be exposed during this approach.
如果病变向导水管扩展或者向外侧进入外侧隐窝，切除C1椎弓可获得扩大的由下至上的手术视角，通过这一视角有利于显露头侧和外侧区域的病变。	If the lesion extends into the aqueduct and laterally into the recesses, removal of the C1 arch can facilitate visualization of these regions through an expanded inferior-to-superior operative trajectory.
图6：该患者采用改良公园长椅位，并将头部向地板侧屈，从而打开颈肩角。	Figure 6: This patient is in a modified park-bench position with his head flexed and turned toward the floor. This neck posture expands the space along the craniocervical junction.
采用直线切口，短的水平线标志横窦的定位。	A linear incision is used. The short horizontal line marks the location of the transverse sinuses.
注意患者肩部向下向前固定。	Note that the patient’s shoulder is mobilized inferiorly and anteriorly.
这一操作增加外科医生的枕下工作空间。	This important maneuver increases the surgeon’s working space within the suboccipital area.
侧卧位利用重力牵引将出血引出术野。	The lateral position uses gravity retraction and the blood runs out of the operative field.
该体位同样允许术者坐着进行显微手术。	This position also allows the surgeon to sit during microsurgery.
图7 膜帆入路手术解剖的投影。	Figure 7: The trajectory of operative dissection for the telovelar approach.
注意枕大孔已经打开，钻孔位于中线两侧。	Note that the foramen magnum was unroofed. Notice that the burr holes are placed on either side of the midline keel.
小脑扁桃体、小脑蚓部和半球内侧部分均已显露。	The tonsils, vermis, and medial aspect of the hemispheres are exposed.
有时如果没有预先考虑到，枕窦会导致明显的出血。	Occasionally a patent occipital sinus may cause brisk bleeding if it is not anticipated.
图8：显示骨窗。	Figure 8: The bony opening is demonstrated.
充分去除枕大孔后缘的骨质（箭头），并且切开颅颈筋膜。	The posterior arch of the foramen magnum is generously removed (arrows) and the craniocervical ligament resected.
C1椎板（棘突上标记星号）在该例中没有磨除。	The C1 laminae (its spinous process is marked with *) are not removed in this case.
图9：弧形切开硬膜并向上牵拉。	Figure 9: The dura is incised in a curvilinear fashion and tacked up superiorly.
图10：显露小脑下表面和上方脑干后，扁桃体蚓垂间隙和扁桃体延髓间隙被分离并打开。	Figure 10: After exposure of the inferior cerebellar surface and upper brainstem, the uvulotonsillar and medullotonsillar spaces are dissected open.
分离平面在扁桃体内侧缘和蚓垂边缘之间进行。	The dissection plane between the medial edge of the tonsil and the adjacent edge of the uvula is developed.
随后向上外侧牵拉扁桃体内侧面，向内上方牵拉蚓垂来显露脉络膜和下髓帆。	The medial surface of the tonsil is then retracted supralaterally and the uvula is retracted supramedially to expose the tela choroidea and inferior medullary velum.
动态牵拉用于扩大扁桃体蚓垂间隙。	Dynamic retraction is used to expand the uvulotonsillar space.
用显微剪刀作锐性分离并保护PICA的分支。	Microscissors are used to prevent blunt dissection and protect the PICA branches.
这一显露的获得不需要牺牲小脑蚓部，但是如果沿着小脑延髓裂和扁桃体蚓垂裂的分离平面黏连紧密，切开微小的蚓部（红线）有时是必须的。	This exposure is often attained without sacrificing the vermis, but minor transection of the vermis (red hashed line) may be occasionally necessary if the dissection planes along the cerebellomedullary fissure and uvulotonsillar spaces are adherent.
下一步，脉络膜和下髓帆被电凝后切开。	Next, the tela choroidea and inferior medullary velum are coagulated and divided.
图11：下髓帆进一步切开（黑虚线）进入四脑室底和外侧隐窝。	Figure 11: The inferior medullary velum is further divided (black hashed line) to access the fourth ventricular floor and lateral recesses.
必须打开枕大孔来获得合适的操作角度。	Unroofing of the foramen magnum is required to gain the proper trajectory.
移除C1后弓能改善四脑室嘴侧半的视野，足以媲美经蚓部入路。	Removal of the C1 arch improves visualization of the rostral half of the fourth ventricle, rivaling that of the transvermian approach.
图12：牵引对于限制蚓部向内侧移动常常必不可少（箭头）。	Figure 12: Retractors are often necessary to immobilize the vermis medially (arrow).
可以获得四脑室底（*）的宽广显露。	Generous exposure of the floor of the fourth ventricle (*) is possible.
此例患者四脑室底被下方巨大的海绵状血管瘤轻柔着色（见图3，下方影像）。	The floor is lightly discolored in this case due to the presence of an underlying large cavernous malformation (see Figure 3, bottom images).
图13：显露四脑室底后，开始显微切除下方病变（海绵状血管瘤或者脑室内肿瘤）。	Figure 13: After exposure of the floor, microsurgical resection of the underlying pathology (cavernous malformation or intraventricular tumor) can begin.
硬膜以不透水方式重新缝合。	The dura is reapproximated and closed in a watertight fashion.
骨瓣视术者喜好还纳或者不还纳。	The bone flap may or may not be replaced, depending on the operator’s preference.
笔者通常将骨瓣还纳避免出现小脑下坠。	I do replace the bone flap to prevent cerebellar sag.
枕下肌肉轻柔的固定但是不要用缝线将其勒死。	The suboccipital muscles are gently approximated but not “strangulated” using sutures.
筋膜也采用不透水方式缝合。	The fascia is closed in a watertight fashion.
患者至少放置在ICU观察一晚上，并采用严格的血压控制管理。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit at least overnight with stringent blood pressure control.
患者在术后最初几天需要常规止吐药物治疗，因为在四脑室底附近手术后强烈的恶心并非少见。	The patient may require a standing order for antiemetic medications for the first few postoperative days because intense nausea is not uncommon following surgery near the floor of the fourth ventricle.
术前吞咽功能受损患者在术后进食前需要谨慎的评估吞咽功能，避免出现吸入性肺炎的风险。	Preoperative compromised swallowing requires a careful swallowing evaluation before eating can be resumed postoperatively in order to avoid the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
这一类患者也有无菌性脑膜炎或者假性脑膜脑膨出的风险。	The risks of aseptic meningitis or pseudomeningocele formation are significant in these cases.
· 膜帆入路比经蚓部入路优点更多，出现神经功能障碍可能更少。	The telovelar approach offers advantages over the transvermian route and is likely associated with less neurologic morbidity,
· 若症状性脑内病变靠近脑室底表面，可以在神经电生理监测下手术，否则不要盲目在四脑室底操作。	The floor of the fourth ventricle should not be manipulated unless a symptomatic intraparenchymal lesion near the surface of the floor is being resected using mapping strategies.
肿瘤与四脑室底黏连时应次全切肿瘤。	Tumors adherent to the floor should undergo subtotal resection.
· 移除C1后弓能改善术者对导水管和外侧隐窝的视角。	Removal of a posterior C1 ring can potentially improve the surgeon’s visualization of the aqueduct and lateral recesses.
三叉神经痛微血管减压术	Microvascular Decompression for Trigeminal Neuralgia
三叉神经痛是影响人类最剧烈的的疼痛之一。	Trigeminal neuralgia is considered one of the worst pains that can affect a human being.
这种严重致残性疼痛能在手术干预后有效缓解，所以微血管减压术被认为是神经外科最令人满意的手术之一。	The severity of this disabling pain and its relief through successful operative intervention have caused microvascular decompression (MVD) surgery to be recognized as one of the most satisfying operations in neurosurgery.
典型的三叉神经痛相对容易诊断。	The typical pain of trigeminal neuralgia is relatively easy to diagnose.
典型的疼痛特征是：单侧、发作性、剧烈尖锐的、电击样的或刀割样的疼痛，皮肤刺激（如触压、咀嚼、刷牙、冷空气或者剃胡须）会使疼痛加剧。	The character of the pain is typically unilateral, episodic, severe, stabbing, shock-like, or lancinating, and exacerbated by cutaneous stimuli such as tactile pressure, chewing, brushing, a breeze of air, or shaving.
疾病初期，三叉神经下两个分支的疼痛最初常被误诊为口腔问题。	At first, it is often mistaken as a tooth problem because of its presentation in the two lower branches of the trigeminal nerve.
患者往往因此进行了不必要的，有时候甚至不可挽回的口腔治疗。	Patients may undergo unnecessary, and sometimes irreversible, dental treatment before the correct diagnosis is made.
据初步统计，三叉神经痛年发病率在女性中约为5.7/10万，在男性中约为2.5/10万。	A crude annual incidence of trigeminal neuralgia is approximately 5.7 per 100 000 women and 2.5 per 100 000 men.
发病高峰年龄为50到60岁，且患病率随着年龄增长而增加。	Peak incidence lies in people between ages 50 and 60 years, with prevalence increasing with age.
疾病初期，小剂量的抗癫痫药/抗神经痛药（如卡马西平）比止痛药更能有效地缓解疼痛。	Initially, a small dose of an antiepileptic/antineuralgic drug (such as carbamazepine), rather than an analgesic drug, can provide excellent pain relief.
然而这类药物仍对高达10%的患者效果不佳。排除其他潜在的病因，这些患者是微血管减压术的合适人选。	However, up to 10% of patients will not respond to these drugs and will still qualify as candidates for MVD surgery if no other underlying etiology is found.
历史	History
1773年，John Fothergill在《伦敦医学社会》上发表了一篇名为《On a Painful Affliction of the Face》的文章，首次完整地描述了三叉神经痛。	In 1773, John Fothergill was the first to fully describe trigeminal neuralgia in an article presented to the Medical Society of London titled On a Painful Affliction of the Face.
1829年，Charles Bell区分了三叉神经和面神经的特定功能，并提出了三叉神经痛的阵发性疼痛与神经功能失调有直接联系的观点。	In 1829, Charles Bell distinguished the specific functions of the trigeminal and facial nerves and introduced the idea that the paroxysmal pain in trigeminal neuralgia is directly related to nerve dysfunction.
Walter Dandy常规通过外侧枕下入路（小脑入路）行三叉神经半月神经节后根切断术来治疗三叉神经痛。在1934年，他首次报告了许多三叉神经痛患者的三叉神经上方有血管压迫。	In 1934, Walter Dandy, who routinely used a lateral suboccipital craniectomy (or “cerebellar approach”) to perform retrogasserian trigeminal neurotomies for treatment of trigeminal neuralgia, made the seminal observation that in many patients who suffer from this pain, the nerve is compressed by an overlying blood vessel.
随后，1967年，Peter Janetta推广了三叉神经痛的微血管减压术。	Later, in 1967, Peter Janetta popularized the MVD procedure for trigeminal neuralgia.
图1.Harvey Cushing 的首批三叉神经痛患者之一。	Figure 1: One of the first patients of Harvey Cushing suffering from an attack of trigeminal neuralgia.
这可能是最早描绘患者与该疾病的图片（上图）。	This image is most likely one of the earliest photographs of a patient with this disease (top image).
Cushing原始素描图展示了颞下感觉神经剥脱手术（中、下图）（由耶鲁大学的Cushing中心提供）。	Cushing’s original sketches demonstrate his technique of subtemporal sensory nerve avulsion (middle and bottom images)(Courtesy of Cushing Center at Yale University).
发病机制	Pathogenesis
三叉神经痛、面肌痉挛、膝状神经痛、阵发性位置性眩晕以及舌咽神经痛等颅神经高反应性的发病机制尚不清楚。	The pathogenesis of cranial nerve hyperactivity syndromes, such as trigeminal neuralgia, hemifacial spasm, geniculate neuralgia, paroxysmal positional vertigo, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia, has remained elusive.
现在普遍认为在脑干区的血管压迫神经是造成这些颅神经功能亢进的主要因素（神经血管压迫-周围性假说），而功能亢进又是由神经根进/出脑干区脱髓鞘造成（突触传递）。	Vascular compression of the respective nerves at the brainstem (neurovascular conflict-peripheral hypothesis) has been proposed as the principal factor involved in the genesis of cranial nerve hyperactivity through demyelination of the root entry/exit zone of the nerve (ephaptic transmission).
然而在部分患者中，在对后颅窝仔细探查后也未能发现压迫血管。	However, in some patients, no compressive artery can be found during detailed exploratory posterior fossa surgery.
此外，在尸体解剖研究中发现后颅窝颅神经与周围相邻血管关系密切，但是这些人在死亡前并未发现有颅神经高反应性相关病史。	In addition, cadaveric studies have revealed an intimate relationship between the cranial nerves in the posterior fossa and the neighboring vessels, but these cadavers had no history of cranial hyperactivity syndrome before their death.
近来研究者们提出了其他因素（中枢假说：三叉神经与面神经核的高反应性），这是不同于外周血管压迫的另一种致病因素。	Recently, investigators have implicated other factors (central hypothesis: hyperactivity of the trigeminal and facial nuclei), in addition to peripheral vascular conflict, as causes for the disorder.
最常见的责任动脉为小脑上动脉（75%）和小脑前下动脉（10%）。	The offending vessel is most often the superior cerebellar artery (75%) or the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (10%).
此外，静脉也可能造成压迫（68%），有时甚至是唯一压迫的血管（12%）。	In addition, a vein may contribute to the compression (68%), and sometimes it is the only compressing vessel (12%).
由于神经根纤维分层，内侧的压迫倾向于导致V2（上颌区）症状。	Because of the lamination pattern of fibers within the nerve root, medial compression tends to cause V2 (the maxillary division) symptoms.
外侧或下部压迫可导致V3（下颌区）症状，极少见的是上部压迫导致的V1（眼区）症状。	Lateral or caudal compression may cause V3 (mandibular division) symptoms, and rarely, cranial compression causes V1 (ophthalmic division) symptoms.
不管三叉神经痛的发病机制是什么，通过移开责任血管的微血管减压术或神经根切断术，为患者提供了一个有效且持久的缓解症状的方法。	Regardless of the responsible etiology in the pathogenesis of this pain, MVD surgery, through mobilizing the offending vessel or performing a rhizotomy, provides an effective and durable palliative option for symptomatic relief.
虽然经皮半月神经节切断术损伤更小，但是后颅窝探查是唯一可以通过非毁损方式辨别责任血管的方法，且疗效更持久。	Although percutaneous procedures offer a less invasive route to the Gasserian ganglion for rhizotomy, posterior fossa exploration offers the only opportunity to identify an offending vessel through a nondestructive procedure with a more lasting result.
患者的年龄和其他并发症是限制微血管减压术应用的重要因素。	The patient’s age and medical comorbidities are important factors that can limit the application of an MVD operation.
70岁以下，、没有手术禁忌症且持续疼痛的三叉神经痛患者，笔者会建议他们施行微血管减压手术。	I offer MVD surgery to my patients who are younger than 70 years and who have no prohibitive medical comorbidities, if their pain is consistent with trigeminal neuralgia.
在本章节中，笔者将描述三叉神经痛的微血管减压术中的细节及关键步骤，最大限度地保证手术安全性及有效性，同时尽量减少并发症。	In this chapter, I describe the details and key steps in maximizing safety and efficiency while minimizing complications during MVD operations for trigeminal neuralgia.
笔者的技术总结了多所学校的神经外科教学精华。	My technique has evolved from a combination of pearls from multiple schools of neurosurgical teaching.
诊断与评估	Diagnosis and Evaluation
三叉神经痛的诊断几乎完全依赖于患者的病史。	The diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia is based nearly entirely on the patient’s history.
如前所述，三叉神经痛典型特征是：单侧、发作性剧烈尖锐的、电击样的或刀割样的疼痛，并且可以通过皮肤刺激加剧疼痛，如触压、咀嚼、刷牙、冷空气或者剃胡须。	As mentioned above, the character of the pain in trigeminal neuralgia is typically unilateral, episodic, severe, stabbing, shock-like or lancinating, and exacerbated by cutaneous stimuli such as tactile pressure, chewing, brushing, a breeze of air, or shaving.
这些特征可考虑神经痛而不是神经病理性疼痛。神经病理性疼痛特征是烧灼痛伴麻木。	This character is considered neuralgic in contrast to neuropathic pain: A burning pain associated with numbness.
随着病程进展，缓解期缩短而疼痛发作时间延长。	Periods of remission tend to get shorter over time and attacks of pain often get longer.
患者每日发作次数少则3、4次，多者可达70次。	Patients may have as few as three to four or as many as 70 attacks per day.
两次发作间歇期疼痛可暂时不被诱发。	There is often a refractory period when the pain cannot be triggered.
约三分一患者在夜间疼痛发作。	Pain occurs at night in a third of patients.
单纯的三叉神经视支区神经痛不多见。	It is unusual to have neuralgia only in the first ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
对于卡马西平或加巴喷丁等神经痛药物治疗有效的患者，更支持三叉神经痛的诊断，并且可能预示着微血管减压术的预后更好。	A positive response to neuropathic pain medications, such as carbamazepine or gabapentin, often supports the diagnosis of typical trigeminal neuralgia and potentially predicts a good outcome for MVD surgery.
在使用神经痛药物或者经皮治疗后，疼痛的特征可能会发生变化，疼痛会变得更加持久。	The character of the pain may change with the use of neuropathic pain medications or previous percutaneous procedures, and the pain may become more constant.
因此，临床医生必须全面了解患者接受各种治疗前的疼痛特征。	Therefore, the clinician should inquire about the character of the pain at its inception before any treatment was rendered.
对于烧灼痛、面部麻木或者（只有）无触发扳机点的持续性疼痛的患者，应该考虑为非典型或者神经病理性疼痛，而不是神经痛。	Patients with burning pain, facial numbness, or (only) constant pain without triggering stimuli are suffering from atypical or neuropathic pain, not neuralgic facial pain.
这些患者不是后颅窝探查的理想人选。	They are not ideal candidates for a posterior fossa exploratory operation.
重要的是仔细检查颅神经分布区的面部及口腔。	It is important to carefully examine the face and oral cavity along with the cranial nerves.
对这些患者的神经系统检查通常没有特殊异常。	A detailed neurologic examination of these patients is usually unremarkable;
三叉神经分布区的轻微感觉变化很常见，这并不是微血管减压术的禁忌症。	minor sensory changes in the corresponding distribution of the trigeminal nerve are not uncommon and not a contraindication for considering MVD surgery.
所有准备行微血管减压术的患者需行脑核磁共振成像（MRI）或计算机断层（CT）扫描检查以排除占位性病变如脑膜瘤、听神经瘤和表皮样囊肿。	All patients who are planning to undergo an MVD operation should have brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or a computed tomography (CT) scan to exclude structural pathologies such as a meningioma, acoustic neuroma, and epidermoid tumors.
在高分辨率T2W像，常可发现血管环明显压迫三叉神经。	On high-resolution T2W imaging, a vascular loop is often evident compressing the trigeminal nerve.
即使高分辨率MRI不能发现责任血管，有典型三叉神经痛的患者仍可以考虑行后颅窝探查。	Even if a high-resolution MRI does not identify an offending vascular loop, the consideration for a posterior fossa exploration is appropriate if the patient’s pain is consistent with typical trigeminal neuralgia.
笔者常给没有“MRI证实”血管压迫的患者行微血管减压术，往往都能在术中找到压迫血管，且术后效果理想。	I have routinely offered MVD to patients who do not harbor an “MRI evident” vascular loop, and I have often found compressive arterial loops during their surgery with desirable operative results.
图2：MRI T2W加权像轴位片显示在脑池段血管袢（红色箭头）压迫了右侧三叉神经。	Figure 2: An axial T2W MRI demonstrates a vascular loop (red arrow) causing compression of the right trigeminal nerve at its cisternal segment.
图3：右侧一个小脑幕脑膜瘤（左图）以及桥小脑角表皮样囊肿（右侧-弥散像）造成的三叉神经痛。	Figure 3: A small right tentorial meningioma (left image) and CP angle epidermoid (right image-diffusion) causing TN.
均行病变切除术。	Both patients underwent resection.
鉴别诊断	Differential Diagnosis
面部疼痛要全面的鉴别诊断，患者的病史与体格检查中几个因素是确定三叉神经痛诊断的关键。	There is an extensive differential diagnosis for facial pain, and several elements from the patient’s history and examination are critical to confirming the diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia.
口腔疾病、颞下颌关节疼痛、眼痛（包括青光眼、眼眶蜂窝织炎和外伤）、面部损伤及骨折、面骨肿瘤或三叉神经肿瘤、巨细胞动脉炎、Tolosa-Hunt综合征（海绵窦特发性炎症）、三叉神经自发性痛（如丛集性疼痛和阵发性偏头痛）、及其他原发性头痛（如偏头痛或紧张型头痛），这些疾病均可引起面部疼痛，且均不适用微血管减压术。	Dental pathologies, temporomandibular joint pain, eye pain (including glaucoma, orbital cellulitis, and trauma), facial trauma and bony fractures, tumor of the facial bones or the trigeminal nerve, giant cell arteritis, Tolosa-Hunt syndrome (idiopathic inflammation in or around the cavernous sinus), trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (such as cluster headache and paroxysmal hemicrania) and other primary headache syndromes (including migraine and tension-type headache) can cause facial pain and are not amenable to MVD.
其他颅神经高反应比如舌咽神经痛、中间神经痛几乎不会与三叉神经痛同时存在。	Other cranial nerve hyperactivity disorders such as glossopharyngeal neuralgia and nervus intermedius neuralgia rarely co-exist with trigeminal neuralgia.
如桥小脑角区肿瘤和囊肿这类结构性病变，以及脑干区的脱髓鞘或缺血性病变，均需要进行鉴别诊断。	Structural pathologies such as tumors or cysts of the cerebellopontine angle, and demyelination or ischemic lesions of the brainstem should also be considered in the differential diagnosis.
当以下征象出现时，应该寻找继发性三叉神经痛的病因：感觉明显改变、耳聋或其他耳源性疾病、难以控制的疼痛、对卡马西平治疗反应差、导致神经分布区皮肤损害或口腔损害所致的疾病，孤立性三叉神经眼支疼痛或双侧三叉神经痛。	Secondary causes of trigeminal neuralgia should be sought if any of the following red flags are present: significant sensory changes, deafness or other ear problems, difficulty achieving pain control, poor response to carbamazepine therapy, history of skin lesions or oral lesions that could lead to perineural spread, isolated ophthalmic trigeminal neuralgia, or bilateral trigeminal neuralgia.
这些表现提示良性的、恶性的病变或多发性硬化症。	These manifestations are suggestive of benign and malignant lesions or multiple sclerosis.
很重要的一点，笔者怀疑那些小于40岁患者典型三叉神经痛的诊断。	Importantly, I question the diagnosis of typical trigeminal neuralgia in patients younger than 40 years.
这些患者都需要经过仔细检查以排除潜在的疼痛病因比如多发性硬化症。	These patients should undergo a careful investigation to exclude over underlying causes for their pain including multiple sclerosis.
此外，双侧三叉神经痛且既往有过鼻窦损伤或手术史的患者应引起外科医生的警惕，给这类患者行微血管减压术有可能不适合。	Furthermore, bilateral trigeminal neuralgia and a history of sinus trauma or surgery should alarm the surgeon regarding the suitability of offering MVD to the patient.
药物治疗	Medical Therapy
治疗三叉神经痛的首选药物是卡马西平，一种抗癫痫药物。	The preferred drug for medical treatment of trigeminal neuralgia is carbamazepine, an anticonvulsant medication.
初次给药可使70%患者完全缓解疼痛。	It initially provides 100% pain relief for 70% of patients.
然而许多患者会出现副作用，主要影响中枢神经系统，如疲劳和注意力不集中。药物相互作用的风险也很高。	However, many patients have side effects to this drug, mainly affecting the central nervous system—such as fatigue and poor concentration—and there is a high risk of drug interactions.
次选的药物是奥卡西平，一种卡马西平的衍生物，与其有相似作用，但耐受性更好，且药物相互作用更少。	The second drug of choice is oxcarbazepine, a keto derivative of carbamazepine that has shown similar efficacy as carbamazepine, but better tolerability and fewer drug interactions.
若患者对这些药物过敏，国际指南推荐使用巴氯芬及拉莫三嗪。	If a patient develops an allergy to these drugs, international recommendations suggest the use of baclofen and lamotrigine.
手术适应症	Indications for Surgery
尽管使用了神经病理性疼痛的药物，一些患者的疼痛仍难以缓解，需要疗效更持久的手术治疗。	Despite the use of neuropathic pain medications, some patients’ pain becomes refractory and they seek more durable surgical treatment.
急性面部疼痛不适用微血管减压术，在考虑手术之前，要经过至少一年积极的药物干预。	Acute facial pain is not amenable to MVD, and, in my opinion, the patient’s symptoms should at least last 1 year with aggressive medical intervention before surgery is considered.
这种观点是合理的，因为一些患者的疼痛只是短暂的。	This philosophy is justified since the pain may be short-lived in some patients.
手术的适应症包括但不限于药物治疗无效或者出现严重不良反应。	Indications for surgery include, but are not limited to, failure of or adverse side effects from medical treatment.
年龄大于70岁或有相关医学禁忌患者应该寻求创伤较小的经皮手术方法比如半月神经节球囊压迫术、射频消融术或者甘油毁损术。	Patients older than 70 years or with associated prohibitive medical morbidity should seek less invasive percutaneous procedures such as Gasserian ganglion balloon compression, radiofrequency, or glycerol rhizotomy.
放射外科也是一种选择，但是在无药物干预情况下，缓解率较其他手术方式低。	Radiosurgery is also an option but the chance of pain freedom without medications is less.
年轻患者（40岁）术前应仔细评估，因为这组病人在上述任一种治疗方式后复发率相同。	Younger patients (40 years) should be carefully evaluated before intervention because disappointing recurrence of pain in this group after any procedure is common.
那种伴随着烧灼痛的非典型性疼痛并不适合进行微血管减压术，术后病情可能会加重。	Atypical pain associated with burning neuropathic, rather than neuralgic pain, is not amenable to MVD surgery, and may actually worsen after surgery.
还有部分患者同时患有三叉神经痛和面肌痉挛，称为“抽动综合征”。	Occasionally patients suffer from both trigeminal neuralgia and hemifacial spam, known as tic convulsif.
手术选择	Surgical Options
三叉神经痛手术方式分为以下两种：	Surgical options for trigeminal neuralgia fall into two categories:
姑息性破坏性手术（三种经皮穿刺手术和放射外科）	Palliative destructive procedures (one of three percutaneous procedures or radiosurgery), and
无生理功能破坏的微血管减压术	Physiologic nondestructive MVD
姑息性破坏性手术通过对三叉神经根造成可控性毁损来达到缓解疼痛的目的。	Palliative destructive procedures involve controlled damage to the trigeminal nerve root with the aim of pain relief.
这类手术包括射频毁损术、甘油毁损术、半月神经节球囊压迫术以及立体定位放射外科毁损术。	These procedures include radiofrequency lesioning, glycerol rhizolysis, gasserian ganglion balloon compression rhizotomy, and stereotactic radiosurgery rhizotomy.
这些姑息性破坏性手术3-5年复发率约为50%。	These palliative destructive procedures have a recurrence rate of about 50% after 3 to 5 years.
相反，微血管减压术对谨慎选择的病人，大概有80%的缓解率。	In contrast, MVD surgery is associated with an approximately 80% chance of pain freedom among carefully selected patients.
效果可持续10-20年，复发率只有10%。	This effect lasts for more than 10-20 years with a recurrence rate of 10%.
对于无法耐受微血管减压术的患者，笔者通常选择球囊压迫术，因为该手术易开展且起效快。	For patients who cannot undergo an MVD operation, I generally prefer balloon compression rhizotomy because it is easy to perform and immediately effective.
若病人因为合并症而无法耐受全身麻醉，且不要求疼痛即刻缓解，笔者会推荐放射外科治疗。	If the patient harbors comorbidities that preclude the use of general anesthesia and immediate pain relief is not a concern, I offer radiosurgery as a reasonable option.
这项治疗不能即刻缓解疼痛，且在治疗期间患者仍需继续服用抗神经痛药物。	Radiosurgery often does not offer an immediate pain relief and many patients continue to require neuralgic medications for their pain control.
笔者用以下路径图来选择手术干预方式：	I use the following algorithmic approach for selection of operative intervention.
围手术期应继续服用抗神经痛药物，直到术后疼痛消失持续1周后可逐渐停药。	Neuralgic pain medications should be continued in the perioperative period and tapered off if the patient remains pain free for 1 week after surgery.
在手术中，笔者不会常规监测脑干听觉诱发电位，但是新手在早期学习曲线中可以监测。	I do not routinely monitor brainstem auditory evoked responses during MVD operations aimed at trigeminal neuralgia, but a novice surgeon may use this mode of monitoring during his or her early learning curve.
一些患者的疼痛重度急性加重时（三叉神经痛持续状态），由于不能进食或饮水，可能需要紧急手术。	Some patients may suffer from severe acute exacerbation of their trigeminal neuralgia (status trigeminus) and may require urgent surgery due to an inability to eat or drink.
下列图片展示了相关的手术相关解剖。	The following images demonstrate the relevant operative anatomy.
图4.乙状窦后入路暴露左侧桥小脑角区脑血管结构。	Figure 4: Exposure of cerebrovascular structures within the left cerebellopontine angle through the retromastoid approach.
需要注意的是，三叉神经在术野深处，离术者更远。面听神经复合体位置相对表浅，自下斜向上走行。	Please note that CN V is deeper within the operative field and further away from the surgeon, whereas the CN VII/VIII complex is more superficial and follows an oblique inferior to a superior trajectory.
这些解剖知识帮助术者更容易辨别这些神经。	This anatomical information should readily allow identification of these nerves.
图5.三叉神经和小脑上动脉（SCA）的关系。	Figure 5: Relationship between the trigeminal nerve and the superior cerebellar artery (S.C.A.).
三叉神经后根在SCA下方进入脑桥中部（A）。	The posterior root enters the midpons below the S.C.A. (A).
SCA向下成袢，与三叉神经后根在其入桥脑处接触（B）。	The S.C.A. loops downward and contacts the posterior trigeminal root at the pontine junction (B).
袢主干的头端分叉后向下在三叉神经的上表面形成压痕（C）。	The rostral trunk loops downward after early bifurcation and indents the upper surface of the trigeminal nerve (C).
SCA向上分叉并离开三叉神经（D）。	The S.C.A. bifurcates above and away from the trigeminal nerve (D).
三叉神经痛微血管减压术	MVD for TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA
微血管减压术的手术解剖暴露是最精粹且最令术者愉悦的。	The operative anatomy exposed during MVD surgery is pristine and pleasing to the surgeon.
用显微神经外科技术来处理神经血管结构，保持术野无出血。这个手术应力求副作用最小。	Neurovascular structures are microsurgically handled and preserved in a bloodless dissection field, and this surgery should be associated with minimal side effects.
对于三叉神经痛的微血管减压术，笔者通常采用小脑上外侧入路。	I routinely employ the supralateral cerebellar approach for MVD aimed at trigeminal neuralgia.
请参阅《扩大乙状窦后入路》章节，其中详细描述了到达三叉神经REZ区的方法。	Please refer to the chapter on extended retromastoid craniotomy for a detailed description of the approach to the root entry zone of CN V.
图6.到达桥小脑角的手术通道及方向：微血管减压术应用于三叉神经痛的手术入路（小脑上裂入路-蓝色箭头），和用于面肌痉挛、舌咽神经痛的手术入路（小脑下外侧入路和绒球下入路-绿色箭头）如上图所示。	Figure 6: The operative corridors and trajectories for accessing the cerebellopontine angle: The surgical corridors for microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia (supralateral cerebellar approach-blue arrow) and hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia (infralateral cerebellar or infrafloccular approach-green arrow) are illustrated.
应避免向内侧牵拉小脑，因为这牵拉方向于听神经平行，增加了听力丧失的风险。	Mobilization of the cerebellum in a purely medial direction must be avoided since this vector of retraction will be parallel to the sensitive CN VIII, increasing the risk of hearing loss.
硬膜下操作	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
硬膜下的显微操作应尽可能减少出血。	The intradural microsurgery should be executed in a blood less manner.
图7：在岩-幕交界处下部往内下方向牵引小脑。	Figure 7: Inframedial cerebellar mobilization just below the petrous-tentorial junction
剪一小片手套（剪成略大于脑棉）作为橡胶垫片，保护小脑半球免受脑棉摩擦所致的潜在的损伤。	A piece of glove (cut slightly larger than the cottonoid) acts as a rubber dam and protects the cerebellar hemisphere from potential injury caused by friction from the cottonoid’s surface.
笔者会将胶片平行且稍低于天幕与岩尖交界处（沟）并朝着岩骨方向下方放置。	I advance the cottonoid parallel and just inferior to the junction (groove) of the tentorium and petrous apex, toward the petrous side.
辨别这些标记以预防：1）小脑上桥静脉意外暴露（或由此产生的撕裂），2）将牵开器直接放到面听神经复合体的下方。	Identification of these landmarks prevents 1) the unintentional exposure (and resultant tear) of the supracerebellar bridging veins superiorly, and 2) placement of retraction directly against the CN VII/VIII complex inferiorly.
轻柔向内下方牵拉小脑半球，暴露岩上静脉。	Gentle inferomedial retraction of the cerebellar hemisphere exposes the superior petrosal vein.
锐性打开静脉下方的蛛网膜，释放多余脑脊液。	The arachnoid membranes just inferior to the vein are sharply opened and additional cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is released.
为了保护岩静脉及面听神经，应该使其上覆盖的蛛网膜保持完整。	However, the arachnoid membrane over the petrosal vein and CN VII/VIII are left intact to protect these structures.
用吸引器轻柔地动态牵拉，在岩上静脉下方往外侧牵拉小脑半球，使静脉略有张力。	Gentle dynamic retraction, using suction apparatus, is exerted over the lateral cerebellum just inferior to the superior petrosal vein, placing this vein under slight tension.
这种方式足以提供所需的操作空间，极少需要牺牲岩上静脉。	Often this maneuver provides all the working space needed caudal to the vein. I exceedingly rarely need to sacrifice the superior petrosal vein.
灵活使用吸引器有利于选择性暴露必要的手术空间，取得三叉神经REZ区合适的操作角度。避免了使用脑组织牵开器以及岩上静脉的牺牲。	Strategic placement of the suction apparatus will facilitate selective exposure of the necessary operative view and working angles at the level of CN V’s root entry zone, obviating a need for fixed rigid retractors and the sacrifice of the superior petrosal vein.
当遇到岩上静脉出血，一般都会尽可能远离硬膜和小脑幕，靠近小脑表面处电凝止血。	If I encounter bleeding from the superior petrosal vein, I coagulate the vein as far away from the dura and tentorium as possible and as close as possible to the cerebellar surface.
这样操作可避免因电凝引起的硬膜皱缩，造成静脉从硬膜上撕拖损伤。	This maneuver avoids retraction and avulsion of the vein from its pedicle at the dura due to its shrinkage by coagulation.
若静脉出血较多，应轻微抬高患者头部，出血突然停止可能是静脉空气栓塞的预兆。	If excessive venous bleeding occurs, the patient’s head should be gently elevated; a sudden cessation of bleeding could be a sign of venous air embolism.
一片脑棉盖在明胶海棉上，轻柔地压迫在出血的静脉上，可以有效控制幕-岩交界处水平的岩上窦撕脱性出血。	A piece of Gelfoam covered by a piece of cottonoid supplemented with gentle pressure will control bleeding from an avulsed end of the superior petrosal sinus at the level of the tentorial-petrous junction.
图8：小心切开蛛网膜和正确地辨别神经很关键。	Figure 8: Careful arachnoid dissection and correct CN identification are paramount.
注意保留脑干周围的血管。	Care must be taken to preserve all of the vessels around the brainstem.
分离深部的蛛网膜应谨慎，首先用球头剥离子分离缠绕的血管（上图）。	Deeper arachnoid membranes should be cut with caution and first dissected free of their entangled vessels with a fine ball-tip probe (top image).
三叉神经比面听神经复合体位置更深、更靠近内侧。	The trigeminal nerve is located deeper and more medial than the CN VII/VIII complex.
面听神经复合体位置则相对表浅，斜向下或向上走行，不要误认为是三叉神经（下图）。	CN VII/VIII complex has a more superficial oblique inferior or superior trajectory and should not be mistaken for CN V (bottom image).
图9：细致地锐性分离蛛网膜，暴露三叉神经REZ区。	Figure 9: Careful sharp arachnoid dissection exposes the trigeminal nerve root entry zone.
血管压迫最常见类型是小脑上动脉沿着REZ区上肩部压迫。	The most common pattern of vascular compression by the superior cerebellar artery is along the superior shoulder of the root entry zone.
神经血管压迫的类型发生率大小如下图所示：	The patterns of neurovascular conflict in the order of their incidence are illustrated in the following sketches:
图10.三叉神经痛不同的神经血管压迫类型：神经受小脑上动脉的主干（A）或其分支（B与C）压迫（左上图）。	Figure 10: Variations of neurovascular conflict leading to trigeminal neuralgia: The nerve is compressed by the main trunk of the SCA (A) and its branches (B and C)(left upper);
小脑上动脉和小脑前下动脉联合压迫（右上图）。	combined compression by the SCA and AICA (right upper).
神经被三叉神经静脉及岩静脉夹持压迫（左下图）。	The nerve is sandwiched between the trigeminal (A) and petrosal (B) veins (left lower).
神经受岩上静脉压迫（右下图）。	The nerve is compressed by the superior petrosal vein (right lower).
SCA=小脑上动脉，AICA=小脑前下动脉。	SCA: superior cerebellar artery, AICA: anterior inferior cerebellar artery.
神经血管压迫区域的蛛网膜增厚。	The arachnoid membranes covering the region of neurovascular conflict are often thickened.
如果缺乏充足的视野和探查常导致减压不足。	A lack of adequate visualization and inspection around these membranes may lead to inadequate decompression.
因此，广泛而仔细分离这些蛛网膜非常重要，这样才能全方位探查三叉神经REZ区周围的各种神经血管压迫。	Therefore, wide careful opening of these membranes is paramount to allow circumferential visualization of any neurovascular conflict along the CN V entry zone.
三叉神经肩处被三叉神经运动根覆盖的狭小的操作空间会妨碍充分解剖和暴露，从而导致减压不充分。	The small working space along the shoulder of the nerve covered by the motor roots of CN V can prevent sufficient dissection and exposure, leading to an incomplete decompression.
轻柔地游离神经，有利于充分探查REZ区外侧、前侧的组织结构。	Gentle mobilization of the nerve will allow a thorough circumferential inspection along the medial and anterior aspects of the root entry zone.
必须强调，许多患者有多条责任血管，找到了某一根责任血管后，应继续探查其他责任血管。	It is critical to emphasize that many patients have multiple offending vessels, and identification of one offending vessel does not preclude the search for another one.
在植入物置入前，应彻底、全方位探查地探查REZ区。	The root entry zone must be thoroughly and circumferentially inspected before placement of the implant.
图11. 将切碎的Teflon置于神经和责任血管之间：通常是游离动脉，并在REZ区沿神经平行置入Teflon，以防止血管压迫REZ区及整个三叉神经脑池段。	Figure 11: Implanting pieces of shredded Teflon between the nerve and the offending vessel: The artery is generously mobilized and a series of small pieces of shredded Teflon are placed along the root entry zone and pushed ahead parallel to the nerve (inset) to prevent any vascular conflict along the root entry zone and entire cisternal segment of the nerve.
笔者用撕碎的Teflon棉团来防止神经与血管的接触。	Pieces of shredded Teflon implant are used to prevent contact between the nerve and surrounding vessels.
考虑到植入物术后移位的风险，应避免使用未撕碎的Teflon棉片。	The use of unshredded Teflon should be avoided because of the risk of implant displacement later.
Teflon棉团置入后沿着神经向前推动。	Pieces of Teflon are inserted and pushed ahead, along the nerve.
这种方法让这些小片植入物符合动脉的形状，从而尽可能降低Teflon棉团迟发性移位的分险。	This maneuver allows the small pieces of implant to conform to the shape of the artery, minimizing the risk of their delayed displacement.
图12：笔者特意在三叉神经肩部及腋内侧塞入一块teflon棉垫，防止血管与REZ区或脑干之间的任何接触。	Figure 12: I specifically insert a piece of shredded Teflon along the shoulder and medial axilla of the nerve to prevent any contact between the vessel and the root entry zone or brainstem.
图13：最后的结果是将动脉全程隔开，使血管使其远离神经，避免与神经组织有任何接触。	Figure 13: The final construct mobilizes the artery along its entire length. The vessel is mobilized and generously padded away from the nerve to prevent any contact with neural tissue.
可以用纤维蛋白胶用来加固这种结构。	Fibrin glue may be used to reinforce this construct.
要避免使用过多Teflon棉，防止肉芽肿形成，这可能导致疼痛复发。	I avoid excessive Teflon implantation to prevent Teflon granuloma formation, which may play a role in pain recurrence.
中央髓鞘沿着三叉神经延伸至远侧，到达Meckel腔。因此减压术应尽可能完整覆盖神经全长。	Central myelin may extend far distally along the trigeminal nerve—as far as the Meckel’s cave— and therefore decompression should be completed along the entire length of the nerve.
岩骨上任何阻碍术者视野的骨隆起都应被磨除，直至可以探查到神经全长。	Any bony protuberance along the petrous bone that obstructs the surgeon’s view should be drilled away to allow inspection of the entire length of the nerve.
沿着神经的所有血管都应被游离：动脉以及大静脉应被游离且垫上棉垫，小静脉直接电凝切断。	All vessels should be mobilized along the nerve: arteries and large veins should be mobilized and padded and smaller veins coagulated and cut.
图14：左侧乙状窦后入路典型的神经血管压迫：蓝色箭头指示神经受压位置（N）。	Figure 14: Classic neurovascular conflict through a left retromastoid craniotomy: The blue arrow highlights the site of impression on the nerve (N) (top image).
动脉（A）以及潜在的责任静脉（V）用Teflon棉隔开。	The artery (A) and the potential offending vein (V) were mobilized using pieces of Teflon (T) implant (bottom image).
图15：缝合硬脑膜。	Figure 15: Dural closure
一般笔者都会追求水密缝合硬脑膜，有时会利用肌肉组织填塞未修复的小缺口。	I attempt a watertight dural closure and may use a piece of muscle to plug small defects not repairable through primary closure.
对于微血管减压手术，笔者一般不追求水密缝合硬脑膜，应为这类手术脑脊液切口漏或鼻漏的发生率很低。	For MVD operations, I do not persist on performing a watertight dural closure because these operations are associated with a very low rate of CSF leak through the incision or the nose.
与肿瘤切除术不同，微血管减压术是非侵袭性手术，术后颅内压增加的风险也较小。	Unlike tumor operations, the MVD procedures are pristine and associated with a small risk of increased CSF pressures postoperatively.
乳突气房需要彻底封闭。	The mastoid air cells are rewaxed thoroughly.
笔者通常会用明胶海绵填塞硬膜外腔。	I cover the epidural space with a piece of Gelfoam.
放回骨瓣或者用甲基丙烯酸甲酯材料进行修补。	The bone flap is replaced or a methyl methacrylate cranioplasty is performed.
最后，逐层关闭肌肉和头皮。	And finally, the muscle and scalp are closed in anatomical layers.
神经血管冲突：变异	Neurovascular Conflict: Variations
图16：微血管减压术术中照片：通常有多条责任动脉（A）和责任静脉（V），上一条责任动脉隐藏在三叉神经运动根（MR）后方（左上图和右上图）。	Figure 16: Intraoperative images of findings during MVD procedures: Commonly, there are multiple arterial (A) and venous (V) offending vessels, and one offending artery (A) is hidden behind the motor root (MR) of the trigeminal nerve (V)(upper left and right images).
使用Teflon棉可以完整地隔开侵犯的动静脉袢（左中图）。	The use of shredded Teflon (T) can thoroughly mobilize the compressive arterial and venous loops (middle left image).
过度增生的岩骨隐藏了血管袢（右中图）。	Hypertrophied petrous bone (HB) may hide a vascular loop (middle right image).
通过磨平过度增生的岩骨，可显露出之前隐藏的血管袢（左下图）。	Following drilling of the hypertrophied petrous bone, a previously hidden vascular loop is visible (lower left image).
静脉袢也可能是血管压迫的唯一来源（右下图）。	A venous loop can be the sole source of vascular conflict (lower right image).
手术探查阴性结果	Negative Exploratory Surgery
如果反复仔细探查神经周围后，未发现责任血管。笔者会用细镊轻轻钳夹三叉神经。	If careful circumferential inspection of the nerve does not disclose an offending vessel, I use fine forceps and gently pinch the trigeminal nerve.
这个动作起到神经切断效果，通常对疼痛控制有效。	This maneuver leads to a rhizotomy and is often effective for providing pain control.
在部分微血管减压术中，只发现责任静脉存在，笔者也会使用这种手术操作。	I perform this same maneuver in some of my MVD operations when only a venous offending vessel is present.
至今笔者还不认同单纯的静脉压迫可引起三叉神经痛，在彻底地探查后，笔者经常行神经根梳理术，并在静脉周围放置Teflon棉。	I have not yet been convinced that venous compression can be the sole pain generator in TN and more often perform a rhizotomy after thorough inspection and implantation of the Teflon around the vein.
笔者不做局部神经横断术，因为有可能导致感觉缺失。	I do not perform partial nerve transection because of the potential risk of disabling anesthesia dolorosa.
术后，患者通常被送入神经重症监护病房观察一晚，后转回常规病房住几天，直至出院。	After surgery, patients are usually admitted to the neuro intensive care unit overnight for observation and then transferred to the regular ward for a couple of days before they can be discharged home.
应特别注意血流动力学参数、神功能检查和伤口护理。	Special attention should be paid to hemodynamic parameters, neurologic examination, and wound care.
预防性使用激素可以防止无菌性脑膜炎，减少术后恶心和头痛。	Steroids are administered prophylactically to prevent aseptic meningitis and minimize postoperative nausea and headaches.
术后一般不会常规做头颅CT检查。	I do not routinely perform a head CT postoperatively.
如果术后一周患者无疼痛发作，可开始停药。	Preoperative neuralgic pain medications are weaned off starting 1 week after surgery if the patient remains pain free.
有时出现迟发缓解，应提前告知患者这种可能性，以避免早期对手术效果的失望。	Occasionally, the benefits of surgery may be delayed, and patients should be informed of this possible delayed effect to avoid early disappointment.
术后并发症管理	Management of Postoperative Complications
感觉神经性耳聋是微血管减压术后极其罕见的并发症。	Sensorineural hearing loss is an exceedingly rare complication from MVD surgery for trigeminal neuralgia.
应当与中耳积液相鉴别。中耳积液是由于开颅过程中，乳突气房开放所致的积液而引起的胀满感。	This hearing loss should be distinguished from middle ear effusion, which is identified as a sense of fullness in the ear caused by fluid accumulation in the middle ear from opening the mastoid air cells during craniotomy.
这种感觉是暂时的。	This feeling of ear fullness is temporary.
如果患者出现脑脊液鼻漏，应立即送入手术室，重新检查缝合的硬脑膜和封闭乳突气房。	If the patient suffers from CSF rhinorrhea, we return him or her to the operating room immediately for repacking of the mastoid air cells and inspection of the dural closure.
若出现脑脊液切口漏，应加固缝合切口，行腰大池引流72小时。	If CSF leaks from the wound, we “oversew” the incision and may use a lumbar drain for 72 hours if the initial incision reinforcement is inadequate.
若停止腰大池引流后仍有脑脊液漏，应送入手术室行硬脑膜水密缝合和切口重新缝合。	If drainage continues when the lumbar drain is discontinued, we return the patient to the operating room for a watertight dural closure and wound revision.
再次手术	Repeat MVD
当体健患者在初次手术中明确存在责任动脉袢时，再次行微血管减压术可以作为他们的选择。	I consider repeat MVD surgery an option for healthy patients who harbored a convincingly offensive arterial loop during their initial surgery.
这类患者在首次手术后都应有较长一段时间的疼痛缓解。	These patients should have experienced a relatively lasting period of pain freedom after their initial MVD operation.
若首次手术没有发现明确的责任血管袢，笔者会建议这些疼痛复发患者行经皮手术。	If I did not find a convincing offending vascular loop during the first surgery, I offer the patient a percutaneous procedure for their pain recurrence.
Teflon棉肉芽肿是一种相对公认的，可能导致复发的因素。因此应当避免过量使用Teflon棉。	Teflon granuloma is a relatively under-recognized occurrence and may be causal, so excessive Teflon implantation should be avoided.
最后的思考	Final Thoughts
经皮神经根切断术用于有禁忌性合并症的老龄患者。	Percutaneous rhizotomy procedures are reserved for older patients with associated prohibitive medical comorbidities.
贯穿神经的神经内血管也能引起三叉神经痛。	Intraneural vessels transecting the nerve can cause trigeminal neuralgia.
应避免在对神经内血管进行减压过分牵拉神经。	Aggressive manipulations of the nerve to decompress intraneural vessels should be avoided.
这些操作可能导致术后麻痹和神经痛。	Such aggressive manipulations may lead to unpleasant postoperative numbness and neuropathic pain.
术中，责任血管与神经关系也许会随着患者体位改变而变化。	An offending neurovascular relationship may change during surgery with the patient’s position.
术中牵拉及脑脊液的释放可能进一步改变二者关系。	Intraoperative retraction and CSF drainage may further alter these relationships.
因此，责任血管可能在距真正的神经血管压迫区1-2mm距离之外被发现。	Therefore, the offending vessel may actually be found 1-2 mm away from the true area of neurovascular conflict.
手术时，术者应充分利用显微外科技术优势。	The surgeon should take advantage of microsurgical techniques when performing this operation.
现有多种治疗方法可供选择，包括风险最小的经皮治疗。行微血管减压术时应确保患者承受的风险低。	In the presence of alternative methods of therapy, including percutaneous procedures that carry relatively minimal risk, MVD operations should be performed with very low risk to the patient.
最后，该手术有一个学习曲线，术者应该始终保持着对自己技术的挑剔，渴求最完美的手术结果。	And finally, there is a learning curve involved with this operation, and the surgeon should remain always critical of his/her performance and aspire for a perfect result.
接受此手术的患者是笔者职业生涯中最感激的人。是他们让笔者荣幸地从事神经外科。	The patients who have undergone this operation are among the most thankful patients in my practice and have made the practice of neurosurgery a privilege for me.
· 三叉神经痛的特点是一侧面部发作性剧烈的、刀割样疼痛，疼痛分布在三叉神经的一个或多个分支，持续1秒至第2分钟，并存在扳机点现象。	Trigeminal neuralgia is characterized by paroxysmal attacks of unilateral, sharp, stabbing facial pain, within one or more divisions of the trigeminal nerve, lasting 1 second to 2 minutes, and precipitated by stimulation of certain trigger zones.
· 三叉神经痛的鉴别诊断包括牙齿和颞下颌关节的疾病，以及某些头痛综合征。	Differential diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia includes disorders of dentition, temporomandibular joint, and certain headache syndromes.
这些情况应该通过了解患者详细的病史和仔细的神经系统检测来排除。	These conditions should be ruled out with an extensive patient history and detailed neurologic examination.
· 烧灼痛、面部麻木的患者，或者（只有）持续疼痛、而没有触发痛的患者应考虑非典型性或神经性疼痛，而不是三叉神经痛。	Patients with burning pain, facial numbness, or (only) constant pain without triggering stimuli may be suffering from atypical or neuropathic pain, and not neuralgic facial pain.
这都不是后颅窝探查手术的指征，建议慎重选择患者进行手术干预。	They may not be candidates for a posterior fossa exploratory operation; judicious patient selection for operative intervention is advised.
· 许多患者有多根责任血管，识别了其中一根责任血管后，仍需继续寻找其他责任血管，在置入减压材料前应对REZ区周围全方位进行探查。	Many patients have multiple offending vessels, and identification of one offending vessel does not preclude the search for another one. The root entry zone must be circumferentially inspected before placement of the implant.
面肌痉挛	Hemifacial spasm
面肌痉挛是一种面神经高兴奋性疾病，目前认为其病因为面神经受到责任血管压迫。	Hemifacial spasm (HFS) is a cranial nerve hyperactivity disorder most likely caused by neurovascular conflict (compression) as one of its underlying etiological phenomenon.
主要临床表现为单侧面部肌肉不自主、阵发性地抽搐。	It is typically characterized by unilateral involuntary intermittent twitching of the muscles of the face.
抽搐一般从眼轮匝肌开始，逐渐扩散至同侧面神经所支配的其余面部肌肉，甚至扩展至颈阔肌。	The spasms usually start around the eye, involving the orbicularis oculi muscle, and later spread to other muscles of the face that are innervated by the facial nerve, including the platysma.
约2%的发病人群表现为双侧面肌痉挛症状。	The spasms are bilateral in about 2% of the patients with this disorder.
面肌痉挛发病率为11/100000，其中女性发病率为男性的两倍。	Hemifacial spasm has an estimated prevalence of 11 cases per 100000 individuals and is twice as common in females as males.
目前文献统计患者一般于发病后8年左右由于严重影响生活才开始接受治疗。	On average, patients suffer from HFS for about 8 years before definitive treatment is found.
面肌痉挛的家族性病例罕见报道。	Familial clustering is rare.
临床上，面肌痉挛症状可表现为面部肌肉进行性，不自主地阵发性或强直性抽搐。	Clinically, HFS presents as progressive, involuntary, irregular clonic or tonic movements of the muscles innervated by the facial nerve.
症状通常于睡觉时缓解。	The symptoms usually persist during sleep.
部分患者由于镫骨肌痉挛可导致患侧耳鸣。	Some patients complain of a “ticking” sound on the affected side, which is caused by contractions of the stapedius muscle.
尽管面肌痉挛无生命危险，但常由于面部抽搐症状影响外观而使患者经受严重的精神压力。由于眼轮匝肌抽搐，部分患者会影响双眼视觉。	Although HFS is not life threatening, patients may suffer severe psychological stress because of cosmetic concerns, and their binocular vision may be compromised by prolonged tonic spasms of the orbicularis oculi.
痉挛症状通常在如演讲等紧张情况下加重。	The symptoms are often exacerbated by psychological stress and speaking.
面肌痉挛与其它面部运动障碍性疾病如眼睑痉挛、面瘫后联带运动的鉴别诊断很困难，往往依赖于详细的病史和体格检查才能最终获得准确的诊断。	Differentiating HFS from other movement disorders involving the face can sometimes be challenging. Some common mimickers of HFS are blepharospasm, facial nerve tics, and synkinesis after facial nerve paralysis. A careful history and physical examination can greatly help the clinician reach the correct diagnosis.
面肌痉挛主要由于面神经出脑干处（REZ）受到迂曲的小脑后下动脉（PICA），小脑前下动脉（AICA）或椎动脉的压迫而引起。	In most patients with HFS, the underlying cause is usually a neurovascular conflict caused by an ectatic or aberrant vessel loop of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA), the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), or the vertebral artery (VA), causing compression at the root exit zone of the facial nerve near the brainstem.
面神经REZ区位于面神经中枢端与外周端交界处并且髓鞘薄弱，受到责任血管压迫后容易发生脱髓鞘改变。	The root exit zone is particularly sensitive to compression because the nerve is covered only by arachnoid in this location and epineurium is absent. Also, no connective tissue septa traverse the individual fascicles in this region that is the transition zone between central and peripheral myelin.
目前对于面肌痉挛机制的假说主要有两种。	Two theories have been proposed to explain the pathogenesis of HFS.
“周围假说”认为面肌痉挛由于REZ血管神经冲突触发异位动作电位引起。	According to the peripheral hypothesis, ephaptic excitations occur at the root exit zone altered by the offending vascular loop.
而“中枢学说”则认为面神经核处的异常高兴奋性才是病因。	In contrast, the central hypothesis assumes that hyperexcitability of the facial motor nucleus within the brainstem is the underlying cause.
笔者认为面肌痉挛的发生可能与两者都有关。	I believe a combination of these two hypotheses most likely accounts for the pathogenesis of HFS.
血管压迫在面肌痉挛的发病中是一个充分不必要条件。	Vascular compression is a contributory and not necessarily the primary cause of this disorder.
图1：Cushing的面肌痉挛患者（Circa 1920）。	Figure 1: One of Cushing’s patients (Circa 1920).
Cushing正刺激患者右侧面部来触发痉挛。	Cushing is triggering the spasms by pinching the right side of the patient’s face.
诊断和评估	Diagnosis and Evaluation
目前为止影像学或其它检查仅有辅助诊断作用，面肌痉挛的诊断主要依靠临床表现及病史。	The clinical features at presentation are crucial for making the correct diagnosis of HFS. No imaging or testing modality has been found to reliably reach the diagnosis.
典型的患者常表现为面部肌肉不自主抽搐，一般开始于眶周的眼轮匝肌，逐步扩展至同侧其它面部肌肉。	Patients usually present with a fairly long history of involuntary spasms of the facial muscles innervated by CN VII, mostly originating in the periorbital region, involving the orbicularis oculi, and spreading to other facial muscles as the disease progresses.
部分患者由于镫骨肌的痉挛而伴有耳鸣。	They may complain of a “ticking” sound on the symptomatic side caused by stapedius muscle contractions.
患者常由于面部痉挛而焦虑，部分患者由于视力受损而影响阅读与驾驶。	Patients are generally concerned about cosmesis, and some are significantly burdened by visual impairment (caused by prolonged tonic spasms of the orbicularis oculi) hindering their abilities to read and drive.
详尽的病史和体格检查对于明确诊断非常重要，包括患者的首发症状，部位，病程，加重与缓解因素以及肉毒素治疗史。	A detailed history and physical examination are important to reach the correct diagnosis. The patient should be asked about the onset of spasms, location, progression, exacerbating and relieving factors, and previous chemodenervating treatments with botulinum toxin injections.
另外，医生应该明确患者是否有贝尔面瘫病史以用于面瘫后联带运动的鉴别诊断。	The patient should also be asked about a recent occurrence of Bell’s palsy because postparalytic facial synkinesis is an alternative diagnosis, although rare.
在临床中可经常发现由于注射肉毒素或持续不断的痉挛导致的面肌无力以及周围血管性病变导致的面部肌肉萎缩。	It is not unusual to find mild facial weakness caused by prior botulinum toxin injections, facial neuropathy related to vascular conflict, or facial muscle weakness caused by ongoing repetitive spasms.
任何伴发的可疑症状如听力丧失都应该排除桥小脑角区的占位性病变如神经鞘瘤，脑膜瘤，胆脂瘤或蛛网膜囊肿。	Any additional findings on exam, such as hearing loss, should raise concerns for an underlying structural lesion within the cerebellopontine angle such as schwannoma, meningioma, epidermoid tumor, or arachnoidal cyst.
另外，一些脑干原发病变如胶质瘤，多发性硬化，脑干卒中也会引起相似的症状，也应予以鉴别。	Certain disorders intrinsic to the brainstem, such as gliomas, multiple sclerosis, and brainstem stroke, can also give rise to similar symptoms and should be ruled out.
一些面部运动障碍疾病与面肌痉挛症状表现类似，如眼睑痉挛（双侧眼睑对称地同步收缩），口下颌肌张力障碍（不自主地口周及脸下部肌肉抽搐），面神经抽搐症（复杂地，协调地，多焦点地面部肌肉运动，且此种运动在双侧面部之间来回跳动），咀嚼肌痉挛，局灶性癫痫以及听神经瘤手术导致的面瘫后联带运动。	Some movement disorders that can mimic hemifacial spasm include blepharospasm (bilateral and synchronous symmetrical contractions of the eyelids), oromandibular dystonia (involuntary and sustained muscle spasms of the mouth and lower face), facial nerve tic (complex, coordinated, multifocal movement patterns, and switches between the right and the left sides of the face), hemimasticatory spasm, focal seizures, and synkinesis after facial nerve paralysis following acoustic neuroma surgery.
在准备进行微血管减压术（MVD）治疗面肌痉挛之前，应给予患者行头颅CT或高分辨率的后颅窝MRI来排除其他结构性病变。	Before considering a microvascular decompression (MVD) procedure, the patient should undergo a CT scan or preferably a high-resolution dedicated posterior fossa MRI to rule out any structural pathology.
如果确实存在肿瘤，MRI可帮助术者术前了解肿瘤的边界（胆脂瘤，脑膜瘤等）以便进行术前准备。	The MRI will determine the extent of the tumor (epidermoid, meningioma, etc) and necessary preoperative considerations to resect the tumor.
MRI T2加权序列可以显示出面神经REZ区域的异常血管扭曲。	A high resolution T2–weighted sequence may display an aberrant vascular loop at the root exit zone of the nerve.
如果面肌痉挛诊断确定，即使术前MRI未发现责任血管，笔者也建议进行手术探查。	Even if a high-resolution MRI does not identify an offending vascular loop, I offer posterior fossa exploration to the patient if I am relatively certain of the diagnosis.
MRI的用处还在于可术前发现扭曲的椎动脉。	The MR sequences can also evaluate the presence of a large tortuous vertebral artery that may not be safely or effectively mobilized intraoperatively.
由于扭曲的椎动脉在术中安全移动时难度往往较大，术者在术前应告知患者术后缓解率会因而降低。	In this situation, the surgeon should discuss the lower rate of spasm freedom after surgery with the patient.
图2：轴位MRI T2加权显示面神经REZ区血管袢（箭头）压迫。	Figure 2: Axial T2-weighted MRI demonstrates a vascular loop (arrow) around the root exit zone of CN VII.
图3：此巨大左侧岩斜区胆脂瘤（注意桥小脑角区面神经周围区域扩大）仅表现为同侧面肌痉挛。	Figure 3: The only presentation of this large left-sided petroclival epidermoid tumor (note the CP angle extension around the facial nerve *) was hemifacial spasms.
此病例通过乙状窦后入路和翼点入路分期切除。	This tumor was resected through staged retrosigmoid and pterional craniotomies.
治疗面肌痉挛的药物包括卡马西平，氯硝西泮，巴氯芬和加巴喷丁等。这些药物治疗的效果均不理想。	The drugs used to treat hemifacial spasm include carbamazepine, clonazepam, baclofen, and gabapentin, but success rates with these medications have been disappointing.
但副作用却会显著地影响一部分患者，导致患者出现疲劳，低落等一系列临床表现。	The adverse effects of these medications notably affect some patients:  fatigue, exhaustion, and poor performance.
肉毒素的注射仅可缓解症状，却无法根除病因。	Botulinum toxin (Botox) targeted chemical denervation injections may help reduce spasms, but this is merely symptomatic treatment.
3-6个月后症状会再次出现，所以需要反复注射。	Since these injections do not treat the cause of the problem, spasms gradually return at the end of each 3 to 6-month Botox cycle, necessitating repeat treatment.
注射肉毒素有可能会损伤面神经运动末梢，这可以解释部分反复注射肉毒素的患者在MVD术后痉挛症状完全缓解但出现同侧面部肌肉肌力减弱的表现。	Botox injections may also injure some of the motor nerve terminals and partially account for some residual facial weakness after MVD surgery, despite successful relief of spams.
注射肉毒素后不断的症状反复促使患者寻求一种更加有效及持久的治疗方式。	Most importantly, the gradual return of spasms at the end of each Botox cycle often leads the patient to seek a more lasting definitive treatment.
据报道，面神经MVD术的缓解率在典型患者中可以达到80-90% ，且持续有效。	Microvascular decompression surgery has a reported lasting success rate of 80-90% in experienced hands and appropriately selected patients, and is the only durable therapeutic option.
绝大多数的患者由于面肌痉挛严重影响外观而会选择进行手术治疗。	Most patients elect to proceed with surgery because of the disfiguring nature of HFS spasms and a desire for an improved cosmetic outcome.
尽管肉毒素可以短暂地控制症状，但是每3-6个月的注射频率以及注射后引起的面部僵硬，萎缩等改变都是患者寻求微血管减压术治疗的原因。	Although Botox injections can provide considerable albeit short-lasting relief, the need to undergo these injections every 3 to 6 months and the cosmetic deformity associated with HFS and Botox injections are the main reasons to consider MVD surgery.
很多神经外科医生更倾向于观察到患者痉挛的发作期和间歇期证实症状典型才进行手术，但笔者却并不这样。	Many surgeons prefer to see the patient in his or her “off” period to assess the validity of the spasms before offering surgery, but this has not been the routine in my practice.
面肌痉挛患者自己往往都会非常了解他（她）们的不适，甚至会录下症状发作时的情形来展示给医生看。	Patients suffering from HFS are generally reliable and know much about their disorder. They frequently have videotaped their spasms during their “off” period.
正是因为面肌痉挛不是致命性的疾病，因而更应该评估利弊，把手术风险降到最小。	Since HFS is usually not a disabling disease, surgical intervention must be conducted with very minimal risk to justify the risk-to-benefit ratio.
正如采用MVD手术治疗三叉神经痛一样，术者的经验对于获得满意的手术效果非常重要。	As with MVD for trigeminal neuralgia, the operator’s experience is especially important in achieving a favorable and safe outcome.
因为部分患者痉挛是自限性的并且可自动缓解，所以病程和严重程度对于评估手术必要性非常重要，笔者仅给予病史超过1-2年且痉挛症状较严重的患者进行手术。	The patient’s history and severity of spasms are very important because spasms are sometimes self-limiting and resolve spontaneously. For this reason, I offer MVD surgery only if the patient has experienced severe HFS symptoms for longer than 1-2 years.
对侧的听力丧失是MVD术的一个相对禁忌症，因为MVD手术有可能会（5%）损伤同侧听神经导致听力受损甚至丧失，术前应该与患者仔细沟通。	Contralateral hearing loss is also a contraindication to MVD surgery for HFS.  Functional hearing loss is a real complication from this procedure (5%) and should be candidly discussed with patients preoperatively.
在面神经MVD手术中，笔者会常规应用脑干听觉诱发电位（BAER）来进行监测（三叉神经痛的MVD手术中不会采用）。	I advocate using brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER) monitoring during MVD to treat HFS (in contrast with MVD for trigeminal neuralgia, when I do not use BAER monitoring).
V峰的潜伏期被认为是监测听力受损的最好的指标。	Latency of Peak V is considered the best electrophysiologic indicator for signaling cochlear nerve damage.
术中笔者也会采用LSR波的消失来监测面神经周围支或面神经核的兴奋性。	I also look for intraoperative disappearance of lateral spread reflex (LSR), a measure of hyperactivity of the facial nerve/nucleus.
LSR波是电刺激面神经的颞支或颧支，在颏肌会记录到的一种波形。	This reflex is produced by electrical stimulation of the temporal or zygomatic branch of the facial nerve, which leads to a response recorded from the mentalis muscle.
LSR的持续消失提示术者责任血管已经被发现并被妥善地处理。	The disappearance of LSR after surgery informs the surgeon that the appropriate pathology was adequately discovered and addressed.
然而，术中必须反复确认LSR的持续消失，因为只有妥善处理真正地责任血管，术后患者症状才会完全缓解。	However, while the disappearance of LSR is reassuring, its persistence is not inconsistent with complete postoperative relief of spasms as long as a convincing offensive vascular loop was identified intraoperatively and handled appropriately.
术中解剖	Operative Anatomy
图4：右侧乙状窦后入路暴露桥小脑角区颅神经。	Figure 4: Exposure of the cranial nerves in the cerebellopontine angle after a right-sided retrosigmoid approach.
注意小脑前下动脉（AICA）和后下动脉（PICA）与VII/VIII神经的关系（A）。	Note the relationship of the AICA and PICA to the CN VII/VIII complex (A).
面神经位于前庭上神经腹侧。	The facial nerve is located anterior to the superior vestibular nerve.
横跨VII/VIII神经的小脑前下动脉或其迷路分支通常并非责任血管，但在处理时候必须小心以免损伤后导致听力下降（B）(图片使用经AL. Rhoton, Jr授权)。	The AICA or its labyrinthine branch transecting the CN VII/VIII complex are often not the main offending vessels and must be carefully handled during surgery to avoid hearing loss (B)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图5: 经左侧乙状窦后入路所见桥小脑角区域解剖结构。	Figure 5: An enlarged view of the left cerebellopontine angle and its contents when viewed from a retrosigmoid approach.
注意到小脑前下动脉（AICA）和VIII神经的关系。	Note the relationship of AICA to CN VIII (A).
在操作过程中必须注意弓下动脉的保护。	The subarcuate artery must be preserved during operative maneuvers.
前庭蜗神经及小脑绒球被抬起用以显露面神经出脑干处。	The vestibulocochlear nerve and flocculus have been elevated to expose the junction of the facial nerve at the brainstem (B).
经乙状窦后入路开颅暴露面神经REZ区域是在前庭蜗神经的下方（图片使用经AL. Rhoton, Jr授权）。	It is important to remember that the retrosigmoid approach exposes the root exit zone of the facial nerve at the brainstem below the root entry zone of the vestibulocochlear nerve (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
面肌痉挛的微血管减压术	MVD for HEMIFACIAL SPASM
笔者常规应用乙状窦后入路经绒球下暴露面神经REZ区。	I routinely use the infraflocculus route through a small retromastoid craniotomy to reach the root exit zone of the facial nerve.
有关乙状窦后入路的相关内容在手术入路一章中已有详细描述。	The general technical nuances for an extended retromastoid craniotomy are presented in the Cranial Approaches Volume.
以下笔者将详细描述面肌痉挛MVD手术的具体步骤。	In the following section, I review the specific steps of exposure during MVD for HFS.
图6 :改良的反“U”型皮肤切口，切口顶点位于横窦乙状窦交汇处。	Figure 6: Modified reverse “U” skin incision whose summit is marked 1cm below the presumed junction of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses.
注意图中患者头颅的位置和方向。	Note the position of the head in the skull clamp.
图7: 图中箭头显示的是进入桥小脑角区的路径：蓝色箭头所标注的是MVD术治疗三叉神经痛的路径。绿色箭头所显示的是MVD术治疗面肌痉挛和舌咽神经痛的路径。	Figure 7: The operative corridors and trajectories for accessing the cerebellopontine angle: The surgical corridors for microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia (supralateral cerebellar approach-blue arrow) and hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia (infralateral cerebellar or infrafloccular approach-green arrow) are illustrated.
在术中不能直接将小脑牵向中线位，因为与前庭神经平行方向牵拉小脑会增加听力受损的概率。	Mobilization of the cerebellum in a purely medial direction must be avoided since this vector of retraction will be parallel to the sensitive CN VIII, increasing the risk of hearing loss.
笔者一般通过小脑下外侧经绒球下路径到达面神经REZ区。	I use the infralateral cerebellar corridor through the infraflocculus route to access the root exit zone of CN VII.
图 8：骨孔和骨瓣（HS：面肌痉挛，GN：舌咽神经痛）。	Figure 8: Burr hole and craniotomy (HS: hemifacial spasm, GN: glossopharyngeal neuralgia).
骨孔位于乙状窦外侧缘和横窦下1cm的位置。	A single burr hole is created at the edge of the sigmoid sinus and 1 centimeter below the transverse sinus.
骨瓣或骨窗的直径约0.25美分硬币直径的1.0-1.5倍大小。	The size of the craniotomy or craniectomy is often small, about 1.0-1.5 times the size of a quarter coin.
在硬膜粘连紧密的老年患者尽量避免骨瓣开颅的方式。开颅时，乙状窦表面的骨质应在骨瓣开颅后用气钻磨除。	A craniotomy should be avoided in older patients with adherent venous dural surface. The last osteotomy is near the sigmoid sinus. The bone over the sigmoid sinus is removed during the next step using an air drill.
对于进一步的手术原则及技巧，请参考扩大乙状窦后入路开颅章节。	For additional nuances, please refer to the extended retromastoid craniotomy chapter.
图9：硬膜打开方法（上图）。	Figure 9: The method for dural opening (top image).
下图显示了术中开颅范围和硬膜切开方式。	A magnified operative photo also demonstrates the extent of craniotomy and dural opening (bottom image).
术中无需暴露横窦。	There is no need to expose the transverse sinus.
与线型切口不同，曲线型切口将肌皮瓣向下翻以免增加术者与操作区域的距离。	Unlike the linear skin incision, the curvilinear incision mobilizes the retracted myocutaneous flap inferiorly and prevents it from increasing the operator’s working distance.
硬膜内步骤	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
图10：向头端及中线方向牵拉小脑。笔者会在小脑表面放置比脑棉稍大的橡胶手套，以避免脑棉与小脑表面直接接触。在逐渐解剖深入桥小脑角区的过程中，由于橡胶手套表面光滑，可避免小脑被粗糙的脑棉损伤（上图）。	Figure 10: Supramedial cerebellar retraction: A piece of glove (cut slightly larger than the cottonoid patty) acts as a rubber dam. It protects the cerebellar hemisphere against the rough surface of the cottonoid as the rubber dam slides over the cerebellum while dissection is continued to expose the cerebellopontine angle (top image).
当辨认出岩骨和后颅窝底交界区域（下图中的P）时，将脑棉沿手套表面进一步深入直至放置后组颅神经附近。	I identify the junction of the petrous bone and the floor of posterior fossa (P, bottom intraoperative image) and advance the cottonoid over the rubber dam near the turn of the petrous bone toward the lower cranial nerves.
应避免平行于VII/VIII神经牵开小脑，否则拉力会直接传导至神经。	Medial retraction of the cerebellum parallel to CN VII/VIII is avoided to prevent direct transmission of retraction to these nerves.
牵开的方向应与舌咽神经平行。	The vector of retraction is parallel to CN IX.
需要注意的是笔者会采用吸引器来动态地牵开小脑而避免使用固定的牵开装置。	Note that I do not apply fixed retractors, but instead use the suction apparatus to mobilize the cerebellar hemisphere in a dynamic fashion during dissection.
随着蛛网膜的剪开与分离，动态牵拉既会减少听力受损的概率，也会更加充分地暴露笔者们术中所需要的解剖区域。	Along with generous opening of the regional arachnoid membranes over the cranial nerves, this maneuver minimizes the risk of hearing loss. Dynamic retraction of the suction apparatus allows intermittent exposure only where needed.
相反地固定牵开器则会过多地暴露不需要的解剖区域。	Aggressive retraction of fixed retractors often provides exposure at places that may not be necessary.
图11. 锐性地分离后组颅神经的蛛网膜并辨认出舌咽神经。	Figure 11: I sharply dissect the arachnoid membranes over the lower cranial nerves and identify CN IX.
向头端及中线方向牵拉小脑使可以更加容易暴露到VII神经的脑干水平。	Supramedial cerebellar mobilization allows me to follow the path of this nerve to the exit zone of CN VII at the level of the brainstem.
术中的BAER监测可以时刻提醒术者避免损伤前庭耳蜗神经造成听力下降。	Intraoperative BAER monitoring guides the surgeon to adjust retraction to minimize undue traction on CN VIII.
在颅内操作的过程中，笔者会不断地冲水以避免显微镜的光源对VIII神经造成热损伤。	I continue irrigating the field periodically during intradural dissection because the intense light of the microscope can cause heat injury to CN VIII.
笔者还会用小块罂粟碱浸泡的明胶海绵覆盖在VIII神经表面以缓解血管痉挛。	I also cover the surface of CN VIII with a small piece of papaverine-soaked gelfoam to relieve vasospasm.
如果术中BEAR监测异常，笔者会进行以下操作：	If the BAERs change at anytime during the intradual procedure, I perform the following steps:
停止操作并松开所有牵开装置，同时用水冲洗手术区域。	Stop dissection and relieve all retraction while irrigating the operative field.
等待数分钟观察BEARs是否恢复正常。	Allow a few minutes for the BAERs to return to normal.
此时适当的升高血压非常必要。	It may be necessary to increase the blood pressure.
在再次动态地牵拉小脑之前，笔者会进一步松解蛛网膜以减少任何对VII/VIII不必要的牵拉。	Before reapplying dynamic retraction, I further dissect the arachnoid membranes over CN VII/VIII to relieve any traction on these nerves while mobilizing the medial cerebellum.
笔者还会用小块罂粟碱浸泡的明胶海绵覆盖在VIII神经表面以缓解由于牵拉或热损伤导致的血管痉挛。	I also cover these nerves with a small piece of papaverine-soaked sponge to relieve any vasospasm caused by traction and the heat of the microscope.
笔者会尝试更加向头端牵拉小脑以避免平行于VII/VIII牵拉。	I then attempt more superiorly directed retraction and use the infrafloccular corridor while minimizing any traction parallel to the CN VII/VIII complex.
图12. VII/VIII神经附近的蛛网膜要充分松解以避免牵拉过程中对它们造成损伤。	Figure 12: The arachnoid membranes over the CN VII/VIII complex are split sharply, close to the brainstem, to prevent undue traction on these nerves during mobilization of the flocculus.
图13. 采用显微剪刀来锐性分离VII/VIII与小脑/绒球之间的蛛网膜。	Figure 13: Microscissors are used to sharply open the arachnoid layers between the CN VII/VIII complex and cerebellum/flocculus.
图14：在罕见的情况下，采用双极电凝来缩减绒球的体积，从而减少牵拉的情况下获得更大的暴露。	Figure 14: In rare circumstances, I coagulate and shrink a small portion of the cerebellar flocculus overlying the root exit zone of CN VII to facilitate exposure of the root exit zone while minimizing the required force of retraction.
图15：血管神经冲突会导致面神经REZ区发生褪色而向灰色改变。	Figure 15: Neurovascular conflict leads to gray discoloration of the root exit zone of CN VII.
冲突处位于VIII神经入脑干处的下方（颜色更加白），用剥离子轻轻牵拉开VIII神经后就可看到面神经REZ区。	This root exit zone is anterior and slightly inferior to the root entry zone of CN VIII (more whitish in color) and may be directly seen upon gentle elevation of CN VIII using a fine dissector.
责任血管（一般是小脑前下或后下动脉）就在VII神经的腋部，抬起血管，将血管与神经分离后即可垫入Teflon。	The offending vessel (most commonly the posterior or anterior inferior cerebellar artery) is hidden in the axilla of CN VII and may be mobilized and padded away from the nerve with pieces of shredded Teflon.
在操作过程中要注意保护责任血管的分支。	The perforators originating from the compressing vessel should be protected during this mobilization.
要注意的是血管神经冲突处位置深在，紧临脑干。	Note that the site of the neurovascular conflict is along the root exit zone of CN VII near the brainstem.
在探查时，这一区域必须充分松解蛛网膜，并以合适的角度动态地牵拉小脑。	This area must be thoroughly examined using the following techniques:  Wide opening of the arachnoid membranes and strategic use of dynamic retraction using suction apparatus at the appropriate operative angles.
图16：上图显示的是REZ区由于临近责任血管袢压迫造成的褪色区域（黑色箭头）。	Figure 16: An intraoperative photo (top image) demonstrates the area of discoloration (black arrow) at the root exit zone of the left facial nerve caused by the adjacent vascular loop.
下图显示的是垫入Teflon之后的情况。	The lower image shows the final result after mobilization of the offending artery and implantation of Teflon.
请注意观察覆盖在VIII神经表面的罂粟碱浸泡的明胶海绵（黄色箭头）。	Please note the piece of papaverine-soaked gelfoam (yellow arrow) covering CN VIII.
图17：责任血管与面神经REZ区域及脑干相邻全程均要用Teflon垫开。	Figure 17: I believe that the offending vessel’s entire length along the root exit zone of CN VII and the area over the brainstem should be padded with Teflon.
一般移开责任血管后LSR波就会消失。	The lateral spread reflex, present in most patients, may disappear upon mobilization of the artery.
尽管不是百分之百确定，但是LSR波的消失意味着病变区域已经找到并妥善处理好。	Although this test is not an absolute, the disappearance of the reflex is reassuring that the pathologic entity has been found and managed appropriately.
笔者将撕碎的Teflon放置在责任血管与脑干之间，	I place the shredded Teflon implant piecemeal between the artery and brainstem.
而不鼓励放置一整块Teflon，因为它的位置在术后可能会改变。	An intact (unshredded) Teflon patch may be easily dislodged postoperatively, so its use is discouraged.
将这些Teflon棉片向上和向下（如插图所示）推，将血管与神经全程垫开，远离脑干。	These pieces of prosthesis are pushed superiorly and inferiorly (inset) to mobilize the artery along its entire length and away from the brainstem.
图18：图中显示责任血管已经被垫开。	Figure 18: The implant has mobilized the artery along its entire length away from the root exit zone and the brainstem.
需要关注的是始终要注意血管神经冲突处一般都位于靠近脑干的REZ区域，而非仅仅是面神经的脑池段。	It is important to remember that the presumed site of neurovascular conflict is at the root exit zone of the nerve near the brainstem and not only along the nerve’s cisternal segment.
手术失败的原因往往是减压不充分。	Inadequate exposure of the root exit zone is the primary reason for inadequate decompression.
责任血管有可能深藏在小脑与脑干所形成的裂隙内（小脑桥脑裂）。	The offending vessel(s) may be hidden deep in the arachnoid membranes or at the depth of the cleft formed by the cerebellum and brainstem (cerebellopontine fissure).
术者的经验缺失或害怕牵拉小脑（不熟悉动态牵拉技术）都可能造成REZ区域暴露不充分最终造成减压不彻底。	The surgeon’s lack of experience or fear of excessive retraction (due to limited familiarity with the use of dynamic retraction) does not justify inadequate exposure of the deeply located CN VII root exit zone and ultimately inadequate arterial mobilization.
更常见的是，术者错误地仅仅将责任血管沿面神经脑池段垫开，而不是充分将其在难以暴露的REZ区域的部分充分垫开，使其远离脑干，从而导致手术效果不理想。	More often than realized, the surgeon mistakenly mobilizes the vessel along the nerve instead of along its hard-to-reach root exit zone and brainstem, leading to suboptimal operative outcome.
图19：硬膜对合在一起即可，不必要水密缝合。	Figure 19: The dura is approximated primarily.
在笔者患者中脑脊液漏的概率非常低，乳突气房用骨蜡封闭，还纳骨瓣或用人工材料颅骨成形，最后逐层缝合肌肉和皮肤。	I do not persist on performing a watertight dural closure and have experienced a very low rate of cerebrospinal fluid leak through the incision or the nose. Mastoid air cells are rewaxed thoroughly (“wax in, wax out”) and the bone flap is replaced or a methyl methacrylate cranioplasty is performed. The muscle and scalp are closed in anatomic layers.
面肌痉挛的再次手术	Repeat MVD for Hemifacial Spasm
造成第一次手术失败的原因包括乙状窦后入路开颅过程中，骨窗没有到乙状窦边缘或者是尾端开颅位置不够低而使得颅内暴露不充分。	Factors that contribute to the failure of the first surgery include restricted and inadequate retromastoid craniectomies that did not extend laterally to the level of the sigmoid sinus or inferiorly to the level of the posterior fossa floor.
另外，尽管面神经脑池段应该探查并充分减压，但主要的减压区域一般都是在面神经REZ区域。	In addition, although the cisternal portion of the facial nerve should be inspected to relieve any neurovascular conflict there, meticulous examination of the root exit zone near the brainstem is mandatory in every case.
笔者曾经处理过一些在其他神经外科中心手术失败的病例。在这些病例中，往往在REZ区域发现真正的责任血管，而第一次的术者仅处理了面神经脑池段的血管。	I have operated on a number of patients who underwent an unsuccessful attempt elsewhere and I have routinely found a convincing offending vessel near the facial nerve root exit zone. In these cases, the initial surgeon presumably only handled the conflict along the brainstem.
通常，术后先将患者送入ICU严密观察，然后转入普通病房住院数天后出院。	Patients are usually admitted to the neuro intensive care unit for overnight observation and then transferred to the regular ward for a couple of days before they can be discharged home.
术后应重点关注患者血流动力学参数、神经系统查体以及伤口愈合情况。	Special attention should be paid to hemodynamic parameters, the neurologic examination, and wound care.
术后激素的应用是为了预防无菌性脑膜炎和减少术后恶心及头痛等不适反应。	Steroids are administered to prevent aseptic meningitis and minimize postoperative nausea and headaches.
· 面肌痉挛是一种不常见的颅神经高兴奋性疾病，通常以单侧，不自主地，阵发性的单侧面部肌肉抽动为特征。	Hemifacial spasm is an uncommon cranial nerve hyperactivity disorder characterized by unilateral, involuntary, intermittent twitching of the facial muscles.
抽搐常自眼周的眼轮匝肌开始，逐渐扩展至同侧面部面神经支配的其它肌肉，甚至累及颈阔肌。	Spasms typically start around the eye, involving the orbicularis oculi muscle, followed by involvement of other muscles of the face that are innervated by the facial nerve, including the platysma.
· 面肌痉挛主要通过详尽的病史和神经学检查来与其他疾病进行鉴别，如眼睑痉挛，面瘫后面肌联动症等。	Differential diagnosis of HFS, particularly postparalytic facial synkinesis, facial tics, and blepharospasm, should be kept in mind and ruled out with the aid of an extensive history and a detailed neurologic examination.
· 术中牵拉小脑时，为避免过度牵拉前庭蜗神经，应沿着舌咽神经方向进行牵拉。	The cerebellum should be retracted only parallel to the direction of CN IX to avoid direct traction on CN VIII.
锐性地分离蛛网膜和动态牵拉小脑可在不损伤神经的前提下移动小脑。	Sharp arachnoid dissection and strategic dynamic cerebellar retraction will facilitate cerebellar mobilization without placing the cranial nerves at risk.
这些操作是充分暴露以利于移开责任血管及垫入Teflon的前提。	These maneuvers allow adequate exposure to permit safe mobilization of the offending vascular loop and Teflon implantation.
· 当移开责任血管时，应使责任血管远离脑干REZ区并垫上撕碎的Teflon才可获得最佳效果。	While mobilizing the offending vessel, it is important that the vessel be moved away from the brainstem at the root exit zone and padded with shredded Teflon; failure to do so will lead to suboptimal results.
舌咽神经痛	Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia
舌咽神经痛（Glossopharyngeal neuralgia，GN）是一种发生于舌咽、迷走神经之耳支和咽支所支配区域的，以阵发性、针刺样剧痛为特征的罕见疼痛性病变。受累区域可包括外耳道、舌根部、扁桃体区、咽后部、下颌角下方等部位。	Glossopharyngeal neuralgia (GN) is a very rare pain disorder characterized by severe, lancinating, paroxysmal pain in the areas supplied by the auricular and pharyngeal branches of cranial nerves (CN’s) IX and X. The affected regions can include the external ear canal, base of the tongue, tonsillar pillars, posterior pharynx, and the area beneath the angle of the jaw.
常见的诱发因素包括说话、吞咽、咀嚼、呼吸、冷空气，或者口咽部皮肤黏膜的其他刺激。	Common triggers include speaking, swallowing, eating, breathing, cold air, and other cutaneous stimuli of the mouth and pharyngeal region.
阵发性的疼痛发作可偶尔伴发循环不稳、晕厥、心脏停搏或肢体抽搐，即所谓的迷走舌咽神经痛（vagoglossopharyngeal neuralgia）。	Occasionally these paroxysmal attacks are accompanied by hemodynamic instability, syncope, asystole, and convulsions, leading to the condition called vagoglossopharyngeal neuralgia.
舌咽神经痛的发病率约为三叉神经痛的1/100，50岁左右患者多见，左侧发病较高，双侧患者约占2%。	Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is 100 times less common than trigeminal neuralgia, generally affects patients in their 5th decade of life, and most often involves the left side. In 2% of sufferers, it presents bilaterally.
国际头痛协会将舌咽神经痛分为两个亚型：经典型和症状型。	The International Headache Society recently proposed a subclassification of GN that includes classical and symptomatic forms.
经典型表现为不伴有潜在原因或神经功能障碍的阵发性疼痛。	In the classical type, the pain is only intermittent without any underlying cause or associated neurologic deficit.
症状型的临床表现与经典型类似，但可能存在间歇期内的持续性疼痛，以及器质性病变导致的相应颅神经支配区域的感觉障碍。	The symptomatic type resembles the classical form; however, the aching pain can persist between neuralgic episodes and sensory impairment can be found in the distribution of the affected cranial nerves due to structural lesions.
大多数舌咽神经痛为原发性，即体格检查及影像学未见明显异常者。	Most GN cases are idiopathic—no abnormality is apparent on clinical exam or imaging studies.
其病因可能为舌咽、迷走神经的严重脱髓鞘及轴突变性。	Idiopathic forms of GN might possibly be caused by severe demyelination and axon-degeneration of CN’s IX and X.
继发性舌咽神经痛的病因包括：血管压迫；桥小脑角区、颅底、口鼻咽或舌部的肿瘤；茎突舌骨韧带钙化；咽旁脓肿；颈动脉穿刺；外伤；拔牙；多发性硬化；Paget’s病；茎突过长（如Eagle’s综合征）；枕颈部畸形；炎症性病变如Sjogren’s综合征等。	Secondary GN can occur due to compression by vascular structures; a tumor in the cerebellopontine angle, skull base, oropharynx, nasopharynx, or tongue; a calcified stylohyoid ligament; parapharyngeal abscess; direct carotid puncture; trauma; dental extractions; multiple sclerosis; Paget’s disease; elongated styloid processes (such as Eagle’s syndrome); occipito-cervical malformations; and inflammatory processes such as Sjogren’s syndrome.
发展历史	History
1910年Weisenburg首先阐述了一例被误诊为三叉神经痛的年轻舌咽神经痛患者。	In 1910, Weisenburg described the first case of GN in a young patient who had been erroneously treated for trigeminal neuralgia.
Pope于1889年首次报道了舌咽神经痛与舌咽神经受血管压迫之间的关联，后来由Walter Dandy 确认。	The association between vascular compression of CN IX and GN was first reported by Pope in 1889 and later confirmed by Walter Dandy.
治疗舌咽神经痛的最初尝试，是针对舌咽神经颅外段的消融，但由于高致残率和复发率而被很快放弃。	Initial attempts to cure GN were directed at extracranial nerve ablation, but soon abandoned because of high morbidity and recurrence rates.
Dandy首先开展了舌咽神经颅内段切断术，短期效果满意，但远期疼痛复发较为常见。	Dandy performed the first intracranial rhizotomies of the glossopharyngeal nerve with good short-term results, but long-term pain recurrence was common.
1977年，Peter Janetta团队报道了6例因异位椎动脉血管袢或小脑后下动脉(PICA)压迫舌咽、迷走神经出脑干区导致的舌咽神经痛病例，由此开始推广微血管减压术治疗舌咽神经痛的理念。	In 1977, Peter Janetta popularized the concept of microvascular decompression for GN after his team reported six cases of GN caused by aberrant loops of the vertebral artery or the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) causing vascular conflict at the root exit zones of CN’s IX and X.
目前，伴或不伴舌咽神经切断的微血管减压术成为治疗舌咽神经痛的标准术式。	Over time, microvascular decompression became the standard treatment for GN, with or without rhizotomy of CN IX.
迷走神经切断术后出现吞咽困难、声音嘶哑的风险较高，逐渐被人们放弃。	Rhizotomy of CN X has gradually fallen out of favor because of the high risk of postoperative CN X dysfunction such as swallowing difficulty and hoarseness.
新的药物如加巴喷丁也正应用于临床，但收效甚少，似乎是因为舌咽神经痛对于药物治疗的敏感度低于三叉神经痛。	Newer drugs such as gabapentin are being used, but with limited success because GN seems to be more refractory to medical treatment than trigeminal neuralgia.
最近尚有立体定向放射外科治疗舌咽神经痛的报道。	More recently the use of stereotactic radiosurgery has been reported.
个人观点	Personal Perspective
微血管减压术（舌咽神经切断、迷走神经减压）是作者个人最倾向的手术方式。	Microvascular decompression (transection of CN IX and decompression of CN X) is my preferred approach to this disorder.
以下对此项技术进行阐述。	This technique is described below.
诊断及术前评估	Diagnosis and Evaluation
舌咽神经痛的诊断是严格意义上的临床诊断，因为没有任何确切的影像学或其他检查方式可对其确诊。	Diagnosis of GN is strictly clinical as no imaging or testing modality has been found to reliably establish the diagnosis.
患者的主诉主要为喉、舌根部或下颌角及外耳附近的针扎样或触电样感觉。	Patients complain mostly of “stabbing” or “electric-like shocks” in the throat, base of the tongue, or near the angle of the jaw and external ear.
根据疼痛分布区域，舌咽神经痛分为两个临床亚型：鼓室型（以耳部为主）和口咽型（以口咽部为主）。	Glossopharyngeal neuralgia has been divided into two clinical subtypes based on the distribution of pain: the tympanic (affecting the ear) and the oropharyngeal (affecting the oropharyngeal area) subtypes.
疼痛通常呈间歇性和单侧性，以左侧多见。	The pain is usually intermittent and unilateral, with the left side more often affected than the right side.
吞咽、打呵欠、咳嗽、说话和摄入某些类型的食物可以触发痛苦。	Swallowing, yawning, coughing, talking, and ingestion of certain types of foods can trigger the pain.
此外，触摸耳朵或外耳道，或下颌的侧向运动常可为扳机运动。	Also, touching the ear or external ear canal and lateral jaw movements have been implicated as triggers.
大约10%的舌咽神经痛患者在疼痛发作时可经历迷走神经的过度兴奋，从而导致心动过缓、低血压、晕厥发作、抽搐，甚至心脏骤停。	Approximately 10% of patients with GN experience excessive vagal effects (output) during a paroxysm (vagoglossopharyngeal neuralgia), which can lead to bradycardia, hypotension, syncope, seizures, and even cardiac arrest.
这可能与迷走神经背核受到舌咽神经的传入刺激有关。	Impulses from CN IX stimulate the dorsal nucleus of CN X, causing bradycardia or asystole.
表面麻醉有助于定位扳机点区域。	Topical anesthesia may help the physician find the trigger zones.
必须进行详尽的病史询问和体格检查。	A detailed history and physical examination is prudent.
应关注疼痛的部位、起源和性质；引发因素；伴随症状如晕厥和抽搐等；既往的治疗措施。	It is important to document the site, origin, and characteristics of the pain; trigger factors; associated signs and symptoms such as syncope and convulsions; and previously attempted treatments.
神经系统检查应注重后组颅神经运动和感觉功能的测试。	A neurologic examination should focus on motor and sensory testing of the lower cranial nerves.
感觉功能测试应聚焦于第V到X对颅神经分布区域，包括面部、耳、腭和舌。	Sensory function should be tested in regions supplied by CN’s V through X, including the face, ears, palate, and tongue.
悬雍垂是否居中，是否存在声音嘶哑以及咳嗽呕吐反射都应该予以检查。	The position of the uvula during elevation of the palate should be noted. Voice quality should be assessed for hoarseness. Cough and gag reflexes should also be tested.
藉由耳鼻喉科会诊完善口腔和咽喉部的检查可有助于排除潜在的肿瘤性病变。	A thorough examination of the oral cavity, oropharynx, and nasopharynx should be performed through a comprehensive otolaryngologic consultation to rule out an occult neoplastic process.
所有怀疑舌咽神经痛的患者都应该行高分辨率MRI以明确舌咽神经根部是否存在压迫性病灶如血管袢或肿瘤、茎突过长、枕颈部畸形、咽及舌部的肿瘤等病因。	All patients with suspected GN should undergo dedicated high-definition magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate for compressive lesions such as tumors or vascular loops, lengthened styloid processes, occipital-cervical malformations, and pharyngeal and lingual tumors.
然后，大多数情况下，影像学并不能证实明确的病灶。	However, most often, imaging does not definitely demonstrate any mass lesion.
部分病例也许能发现明显的血管袢压迫，但是对于临床诊断相对确切的舌咽神经痛，即使没有上述影像学阳性发现，也可有后颅窝探查的指征。	A vascular loop may be evident, but an absence of it does not disqualify the patient for posterior fossa exploratory surgery if the diagnosis is relatively certain.
MRI的价值体现在术前发现巨大迂曲椎动脉压迫型的病例，从而使术者做好应对这一棘手情况的准备。	The MRI may warn me of the presence of a large tortuous vertebral artery that will require creative methodology for its mobilization.
图1：轴位高分辨率MRI显示一血管袢（蓝色箭头）位于脑干附近的后组颅神经层面（绿色箭头）。	Figure 1:  Axial high-resolution MRI demonstrates a vascular loop (blue arrow) at the level of lower cranial nerves near the brainstem (green arrow).
颈静脉孔阻滞以及咽喉部表面麻醉有效则有助于舌咽神经痛的诊断。	The diagnosis can be facilitated if there is cessation of pain when CN IX is blocked at the jugular foramen and if administration of topical anesthesia at the pharynx stops the pain.
但确诊的最有效手段仍然是详尽的病史采集。	These maneuvers are helpful, but careful history taking is the most accurate way to establish a correct diagnosis.
必须意识到舌咽神经痛尚可与其他面部疼痛性疾病相伴发。	The clinician must be cognizant of the simultaneous co-existence of GN and other facial pain syndromes.
其症状与其他三种颅神经兴奋性病变有重叠：	Glossopharyngeal neuralgia syndrome can have significant overlap with three other cranial nerve hyperactivity syndromes:
· 当下颌角受累时，舌咽神经痛误诊为三叉神经痛者并不少见。	Not infrequently, GN is misdiagnosed as trigeminal neuralgia, especially if the angle of the jaw is one of the affected sites.
· 当仅表现为耳部疼痛时，舌咽神经痛与中间神经痛（又称为原发性耳痛、Jacobson’s神经痛）难以鉴别。	Moreover, GN can be confused with nervus intermedius neuralgia (primary otalgia, Jacobson’s neuralgia) when the only affected region is the ear.
· 喉上神经痛也可与舌咽神经痛相混淆。	Superior laryngeal neuralgia can also mimic GN and create diagnostic confusion.
颞下颌关节紊乱和颞动脉炎的疼痛部位可与舌咽神经痛一致，但根据疼痛性质不同以兹鉴别。	Temporomandibular joint disorders and temporal arteritis can have the same anatomic locations of pain, but they have different pain characteristics.
多发性硬化是舌咽神经痛极其罕见的病因。	Multiple sclerosis is an extremely rare cause of GN.
手术指征	Indications for Surgery
传统上，舌咽神经痛首选药物治疗。	Traditionally, the first line of treatment is pharmacologic.
手术治疗常是作为药物治疗后出现耐药、无效、过敏或副作用等情况下的选择。	Surgical options may be considered in situations of drug intolerance, inefficacy, allergies, or side effects.
常用的药物包括抗癫痫药物，如卡马西平、加巴喷丁、苯妥英钠、奥卡西平或普瑞巴林。	Drugs most commonly used for GN include anti-epileptic medications such as carbamazepine, gabapentin, phenytoin, oxcarbazepine, or pregabalin.
一些抗抑郁药也会有所帮助，可单独使用或与抗癫痫药物合用。	Some antidepressants can also be helpful, either alone or in conjunction with anti-epileptic drugs.
不幸的是，药物治疗效果多数不佳。	Unfortunately, medical therapy is almost uniformly ineffective.
为此，几乎所有患者最终都会选择微血管减压术。	For this reason, almost all patients eventually consider microvascular decompression because it is an effective procedure for appropriately selected candidates.
对于合适的病例，经验丰富的医生可实现大约90%的远期疼痛缓解率。	In the hands of an experienced surgeon, long-term pain freedom is achieved in approximately 90% of patients.
术前关注点	Preoperative Considerations
舌咽神经痛的微血管减压术中应进行电生理监测。	Intraoperative monitoring is employed during microvascular decompression for GN.
脑干听觉诱发电位（BAERs）应常规进行。	Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) should be used routinely.
为了减小麻醉的干扰，一般使用浓度小于1%的吸入性麻醉剂。	To reduce any hindrance with monitoring, we use volatile general anesthetic agents at a concentration below 1%.
术中应警惕迷走神经兴奋引起血流动力学不稳的高风险。	Intraoperatively, these patients are at high risk for hemodynamic instability due to hyperactivity of the vagus nerve.
插管前预麻醉与插管时阿托品的使用可以减少血流动力学骤变的发生。	Prophylactic anesthetization of the oropharynx and atropine at the time of intubation will reduce the likelihood of sudden hemodynamic instability.
对于术前即有晕厥发作的患者，强烈建议行心脏起搏器治疗。	Cardiac pacing should be strongly considered for patients with preoperative syncopal episodes.
手术入路	Surgical Approach
有数个入路可用于微血管减压术治疗舌咽神经痛。	A few different approaches have been described for microvascular decompression as applied to GN.
最常用的两个是枕下绒球下入路和经髁入路。	The two most common approaches are suboccipital infrafloccular and transcondylar.
由于前者不需要磨除枕髁而创伤较小，且也能获得满意的暴露，故笔者提倡这一入路。	We advocate the former since it does not require drilling of the condyle and is therefore less disruptive while providing excellent exposure.
以下即对乳突后绒球下入路显露舌咽、迷走神经出脑干区的手术步骤进行阐述。	The following steps describe the retromastoid infrafloccular route to the root exit zones of CN’s IX and X.
下图展示了相关的手术解剖。	The following images illustrate the relevant operative anatomy.
图2 ：右侧乙状窦后入路暴露颈静脉孔区。	Figure 2: Right-sided retrosigmoid approach to the jugular foramen.
A：抬起小脑观察桥小脑角区颅神经及其与椎动脉（VA）的关系。	The cerebellum has been elevated to expose the cranial nerves within the cerebellopontine angle and their relationship to the vertebral artery (VA) (A).
B：舌咽神经与脉络丛、菱唇的关系。	Note the relationship of the choroid plexus and rhomboid lip to CN IX (B).
C、D：颈静脉孔区放大观，注意在颈静脉孔内分开舌咽神经和迷走神经的硬膜分隔。（图片由AL. Rhoton Jr授权）	Enlarged view of the jugular foramen: Note the dural septum that separates CN’s IX and X at the level of the jugular foramen (C and D)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
治疗舌咽神经痛的微血管减压术	MVD for GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL NEURALGIA
绒球下入路可通过乳突后的小骨窗开颅进行。	The infraflocculus route is performed through a small retromastoid craniotomy.
关于扩大乳突后开颅的常规技术要点，请参见颅脑手术入路卷。	The general technical nuances for an extended retromastoid craniotomy are presented in the Cranial Approaches Volume.
以下阐述的是针对舌咽神经痛微血管减压术的特殊步骤。	In the following sections, I will review the specific steps of exposure related to microvascular decompression for GN.
图3：取倒“U”型皮肤切口，切口顶点位于乙状窦与横窦交点下方1cm，注意头架的摆放（左下图）。	Figure 3: Modified reverse “U” skin incision whose summit is marked 1cm below the presumed junction of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses.  Note the position of the head in the skull clamp (bottom left image).
图4：进入桥小脑角区手术路径：蓝色：三叉神经微血管减压术-小脑上外侧入路；绿色：面神经、舌咽神经减压术-小脑下外侧或绒球下入路。	Figure 4: The operative corridors and trajectories for accessing the cerebellopontine angle: The surgical corridors for microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia (supralateral cerebellar approach-blue arrow) and hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia (infralateral cerebellar or infrafloccular approach-green arrow) are illustrated.
应避免单纯向内侧牵拉小脑，因为该方向恰与前庭蜗神经平行，易增加听力受损的风险。	Mobilization of the cerebellum in a purely medial direction must be avoided since this vector of retraction will be parallel to the sensitive CN VIII, increasing the risk of hearing loss.
术者习惯从小脑下外侧经绒球下入路显露舌咽、迷走神经出脑干区。	I use the infralateral cerebellar corridor through the infraflocculus route to access the root exit zone of CN’s IX and X.
图5：钻孔及开颅（HS：面肌痉挛，GN：舌咽神经痛）。	Figure 5: Burr hole and craniotomy (HS: hemifacial spasm, GN: glossopharyngeal neuralgia).
在乙状窦后缘与横窦转角处下方1cm处钻孔。	A single burr hole is created at the edge of the sigmoid sinus and 1 centimeter below the transverse sinus.
通常作一小骨窗，大小约为25美分硬币的1~1.5倍。	The size of the craniotomy or craniectomy is often small, about 1.0-1.5 times the size of a quarter coin.
对于存在静脉窦粘连的老年患者，应避免采用骨瓣开颅术。	A craniotomy should be avoided in older patients with adherent venous dural surface.
最后铣开的（2）是乙状窦一侧。	The last osteotomy (2) is near the sigmoid sinus.
下一步是用气钻磨除乙状窦上方的骨质。	The bone over the sigmoid sinus is removed during the next step using an air drill.
（开颅具体细节参阅扩大乳突后入路章节）	For additional nuances, please refer to the extended retromastoid craniotomy chapter.
图6：硬膜切开技术（上图）。	Figure 6: A technique for incising the dura (top image).
术中照片显示了骨窗范围和硬膜切口，该切口平行于乙状窦和后颅窝底。	A magnified operative photo demonstrates the extent of craniotomy and dural opening parallel to the sigmoid sinus and floor of posterior fossa (bottom image).
横窦无需暴露。	There is no need to expose the transverse sinus.
这种硬膜切开方式使得大部分硬膜与小脑贴附，从而减少显微镜光源下硬脑膜的干燥和挛缩。	This mode of dural opening leaves most the dura on the cerebellum and therefore avoids desiccation and shrinkage of the dura under the operating microscope’s intense light.
与直切口不同，U形皮肤切口可将肌皮瓣向下牵开，从而增加了工作角度，缩短了术者的操作距离。	Unlike the linear skin incision, the curvilinear incision mobilizes the retracted myocutaneous flap inferiorly and prevents it from increasing the operator’s working distance.
硬膜内操作	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
图7：向上内侧牵开小脑：从橡胶手套剪取一块（比棉片稍大）作为缓冲垫，隔着该橡胶片沿小脑表面深入时，可避免粗糙的棉片对小脑的摩擦（上图）。	Figure 7: Supramedial cerebellar retraction: A piece of glove (cut slightly larger than the cottonoid patty) acts as a rubber dam. It protects the cerebellar hemisphere against the rough surface of the cottonoid as the rubber dam slides over the cerebellum while dissection is continued to expose the cerebellopontine angle (top image).
辨认岩骨与后颅窝底（下图术中照片中的P）的转折后，于此处隔着橡胶片将棉片朝向后组颅神经进一步深入。	I identify the junction of the petrous bone and the floor of posterior fossa (P, bottom intraoperative image) and advance the cottonoid over the rubber dam near the turn of the petrous bone toward the lower cranial nerves.
再次强调不要平行于面听神经向内侧牵拉小脑，以避免间接牵拉神经。	Medial retraction of the cerebellum parallel to CN VII/VIII is avoided to prevent direct transmission of retraction to these nerves.
小脑牵拉方向应平行于舌咽神经。	The vector of retraction is parallel to CN IX.
个人不建议使用固定牵开器，可以在分离蛛网膜时用吸引器动态牵拉小脑。	Note that I do not apply fixed retractors, but instead use the suction apparatus to mobilize the cerebellar hemisphere in a dynamic fashion during dissection.
伴随着颅神经表面的蛛网膜逐渐松解开，损伤听力的几率就会很低。	Along with generous opening of the regional arachnoid membranes over the cranial nerves, this maneuver minimizes the risk of hearing loss.
利用吸引器的动态牵拉，可实现间断性的按需暴露。	Dynamic retraction of the suction apparatus allows intermittent exposure only where needed.
使用固定牵开器过度牵拉往往也是多余暴露。	Aggressive retraction of fixed retractors often provides exposure at places that may not be necessary.
图8：锐性分离后组颅神经表面的蛛网膜，并辨认舌咽神经。	Figure 8: I sharply dissect the arachnoid membranes over the lower cranial nerves and identify CN IX.
通过将小脑向上内侧牵拉，可以顺着舌咽神经一直暴露到脑干层面的神经根出脑干区。	Supramedial cerebellar mobilization allows me to follow the path of this nerve to its the exit zone at the level of the brainstem.
术中BAER监测，可指导术者调整操作以最大限度地减少对前庭蜗神经的牵拉。	Intraoperative BAER monitoring guides the surgeon to adjust retraction to minimize undue traction on CN VIII.
作者会间断的向分离开的术野内打水以减少显微镜灯光对前庭蜗神经的热损伤。	I continue irrigating the field periodically during intradural dissection because the intense light of the microscope can cause heat injury to CN VIII.
如果前庭蜗神经完全暴露，则用浸有罂粟碱的明胶海绵覆盖神经表面以缓解血管痉挛。	If exposed, I also cover the surface of CN VIII with a small piece of papaverine-soaked gelfoam to relieve vasospasm.
若在术中任何时刻出现BAERs的变化，术者会采取以下措施：	If the BAERs change at anytime during the intradual procedure, I perform the following steps:
停止分离和一切牵拉，并冲洗术野。	Stop dissection and relieve all retraction while irrigating the operative field.
等待数分钟至BAERs恢复正常。	Allow a few minutes for the BAERs to return to normal.
有时需要升高血压。	It may be necessary to increase the blood pressure.
在再次进行动态牵拉之前，进一步锐性松解面听神经束周围的蛛网膜，去除移动小脑内侧部时所有可能造成神经受牵拉的因素。	Before reapplying dynamic retraction, I further dissect the arachnoid membranes over CN VII/VIII to relieve any traction on these nerves while mobilizing the medial cerebellum.
同样可以在神经的表面敷以浸有罂粟碱的明胶海绵，以缓解牵拉造成的血管痉挛和显微镜的热损伤。	I also cover these nerves with a small piece of papaverine-soaked sponge to relieve any vasospasm caused by traction and the heat of the microscope.
通常采用更为向上的牵拉，利用绒球下径路以最大程度地减少平行于面听神经束的牵拉。	I then attempt more superiorly directed retraction and use the infrafloccular corridor while minimizing any traction parallel to the CN VII/VIII complex.
图9：锐性分离面听神经束表面的蛛网膜至脑干，以避免绒球移动时面听神经受到不当的牵拉。	Figure 9: The arachnoid membranes over the CN VII/VIII complex are split sharply, close to the brainstem, to prevent undue traction on these nerves during mobilization of the flocculus.
图10：当蛛网膜充分松解后，后组颅神经与面听神经的关系就会清晰显露（上图）。	Figure 10: Once the arachnoid membranes are dissected, the anatomy of the lower cranial nerves in relation to CN VII/VIII complex should be easily appreciated (top image).
责任动脉（A）通常位于舌咽、迷走神经之间。	The offending artery (A) is usually apparent between CN’s IX and X.
其间的蛛网膜必须锐性松解直至清晰辨认并分离各神经（下图）。	The arachnoid bands between CN’s IX and X must be sharply transected and the nerves clearly identified and separated (bottom image).
鉴于可能存在的解剖变异，在进行舌咽神经切断和迷走神经减压之前，明确辨认各颅神经非常重要。	Given the variations that could be present, it is important to correctly identify cranial nerves before CN IX transection and CN X decompression is undertaken.
分辨舌咽神经和迷走神经的方法有几种：	There are several ways to distinguish CN IX from CN X:
舌咽神经于颈静脉孔的头侧部穿入其中，因此，其更靠近前庭蜗神经。	The entrance porus of CN IX is at the cranial portion of the jugular foramen, and hence, it is closest to CN VIII.
在入颈静脉孔处，舌咽神经与迷走、副神经之间存在一硬膜分隔。	The porus of CN IX is separated from those of CN’s X and XI by a dural crest.
这一硬膜分隔在术中可能并非总是那么显著。	The crest might not always be apparent intraoperatively.
然而，也只有在这一硬膜分隔及膜性孔道开口的近端，才可恒定地区分出舌咽神经和迷走神经。	However, the only location where CN IX can be consistently distinguished from CN X is just proximal to the dural meati and crest.
图11：一旦充分显露第VII至X对颅神经，作者即在电凝后于脑干旁锐性切断舌咽神经。	Figure 11: Once CN’s VII through X can be adequately visualized, I sharply divide CN IX close to the brainstem after its coagulation.
在此之前，需提醒麻醉师注意血流动力学变化，尤其对于老年患者。	Before dividing the nerve, I give proper warning to the anesthesiologist since dramatic hypotension or tachycardia is possible, especially among older patients.
根据作者经验，舌咽神经切断后的并发症非常小，并能为迷走神经的充分减压提供不少必备的空间。	In my experience, the morbidity risk of severing CN IX is minimal, and this maneuver provides valuable and much needed space to adequately decompress CN X.
图12：随后沿着脑干下部将责任血管袢从迷走神经出脑干区移位。	Figure 12: I then proceed to mobilize the offending vascular loop away from the CN X root exit zone along the lower brainstem.
有人主张在未见明显血管压迫的情况下，剪断迷走神经的上部2根根丝。	Some operators advocate transection of the upper two rootlets of CN X, if no obvious vascular compression is found.
但作者不建议这样做，因为剪断后出现声音嘶哑及声带麻痹的风险很大。	However, I have abandoned this practice due to its associated high risk of postoperative hoarseness and vocal cord paresis.
对于充分筛选的病例，作者总能在迷走神经出脑干区发现责任血管袢。	With appropriate patient selection for surgery, I have always found a convincing vascular loop along the root exit zone of CN X.
操作过程中应特别注意避免损伤发自PICA和椎动脉的小穿支动脉。	I pay particular attention to the perforating vessels coming off of the PICA and vertebral arteries as their injury should be avoided.
应该探查颅神经脑池段的全程。	The cranial nerves should be examined along their entire exposed cisternal segment.
经验不丰富的医师可能会忽视颅神经近脑干区，而造成减压的不充分。	Inexperienced surgeons can easily overlook the area of the brainstem due to its inaccessibility and therefore accomplish an inadequate decompression.
为了避免迷走神经的过度牵拉，直接暴露其出脑干区并非易事；但沿着迷走神经的肩部从小脑延髓裂分离，可以显露迷走神经根部的责任血管袢。	To avoid untoward traction on CN X, in most cases, direct exposure of its root exit zone might not be feasible; however, inspection of the cerebellomedullary fissure along the shoulder of the nerve will reveal a vascular loop causing neurovascular conflict at the root exit zone of CN X.
抬起责任血管时应该动作轻柔，避免损伤穿支血管。	This arterial loop must be carefully mobilized away from the root exit zone, protecting the associated perforators.
不应以担心小脑受牵拉作为暴露和减压不充分的借口。	A fear of cerebellar retraction should not justify inadequate exposure and decompression.
充分松解内侧蛛网膜，并有策略地动态牵拉小脑是显露责任血管的有效方式。	Careful dissection of the medial arachnoid membranes and strategic dynamic cerebellar retraction will lead to identification of the specific offending vessels.
图13：为实现彻底减压，作者将多块Teflon碎棉片置于迷走神经的上方和下方，以及神经层面的脑干和责任血管袢之间（上方插图）。	Figure 13: To thoroughly relieve the neurovascular conflict, I implant multiple pieces of shredded Teflon while working above and below CN X. Teflon is also placed between the brainstem and the offending loop at the level of CN X (top image-inset).
有序放置Teflon棉以移位血管袢并防止其返回原来的位置（下图）。	Sequential introduction of these pieces of Teflon helps with mobilization of the vessel and prevents its return to its original position (bottom image).
但应避免置入过量的Teflon棉，因其可能造成炎性反应和化学系脑膜炎。	An excessive amount of Teflon should be avoided as it can cause an inflammatory reaction and chemical meningitis.
对于粗大的椎动脉或PICA，单纯置入Teflon棉可能难以实现彻底的减压。	Large vertebral artery or PICA offending vessels may not be readily mobilized using pieces of Teflon.
关于零星报道的“悬吊”法，即将血管悬吊并缝于岩骨的硬膜上，作者始终未能成功实践。	I have not been able to safely use the sporadically reported “sling” methods to prepare the sling around the vessel and suture the sling to the petrous dura to move the vessel.
考虑此处空间狭小，存在损伤周围重要神经血管的风险，作者并不推荐这样的方式。	I do not recommend such an attempt due to the limited space available and the attended risks to the vital neighboring cerebrovascular structures.
对于上述粗大迂曲血管压迫的病例，作者会尽力使用Teflon碎棉片垫开血管。	If a large tortuous vessel is encountered, I do my best to pad the vessel using shredded Teflton.
当术前MRI提示存在粗大动脉压迫时，作者都会告知患者，术后的疼痛缓解率可能会降低。	I am usually able to consult patients regarding the lower chance of pain freedom based on the finding of the large vessel on the preoperative MRI.
图14：一例左侧舌咽神经痛的术中图像。	Figure 14: Intraoperative findings in another case of left-sided GN.
A：打开后组颅神经表面的蛛网膜后，发现血管压迫很明显。	Neurovascular conflict is apparent upon opening of arachnoid membranes around the lower cranial nerves (A).
B：横断舌咽神经。C：在脑干层面显露血管压迫。	Transection of CN IX (B) and vascular conflict at the level of the brainstem (C).
D：动态牵拉小脑充分暴露迷走神经出脑干区，并可发现此处局部的颜色改变（*）。	Dynamic retraction allows excellent exposure of the root exit zone of CN X and discoloration of the nerve exit zone (*)(D).
注意责任血管使得神经纤维呈分散状。	Please note the nerve fibers are separated by the offending vessel.
E：垫上Teflon片后充分解除脑干附近的血管压迫。	Insertion of Teflon pledgets assures adequate resolution of the conflict near the brainstem (E).
图15：硬膜缝合。	Figure 15:  Dural closure
对硬脑膜进行大致的缝合。	The dura is approximated primarily.
作者认为并不需要“水密”缝合硬脑膜，微血管减压术后发生脑脊液漏的概率仍非常低。	I do not perform a "watertight' dural closure and have experienced a very low rate of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak for microvascular decompression operations.
对于乳突气房应再次用骨蜡充分封闭（“wax in, wax out”），随后将骨瓣回纳或用材料修补。	Mastoid air cells are rewaxed thoroughly (“wax in, wax out”) and the bone flap is replaced or a methylmethacrylate cranioplasty is performed.
分层缝合肌肉及皮肤。	The muscle and scalp are closed in anatomical layers.
术后关注	Postoperative Considerations
患者术后入住监护室观察一晚，重点关注血流动力学改变，神经查体及伤口护理，病情平稳后转入普通病房。	Patients are usually admitted to the neuro intensive care unit for an overnight stay for observation and then transferred to a regular ward for a couple of days before they can be discharged home. Special attention should be paid to hemodynamic parameters, neurologic examination, and wound care.
一些患者可能有一过性的声音嘶哑或吞咽困难。	Some patients may develop transient hoarseness or dysphagia.
进食前应充分评估患者的吞咽功能，以防止误吸。	It is reasonable to assess the patient’s swallowing status before commencing an oral diet to minimize the risk of aspiration.
脑脊液漏并非常见的并发症；如有术后的脑脊液鼻漏或耳漏，作者会立即行二次手术“水密”缝合硬膜，并再次予以骨蜡封闭气房。	Cerebrospinal fluid leak is an uncommon complication; if the patient suffers from CSF otorrhea or rhinorrhea, I return him or her to the operating room immediately to close the dura in a “water-tight” fashion and rewax the mastoid air cells.
如果脑脊液从切口漏出，则先予以伤口加压包并给予腰大池引流72小时。	If CSF is leaking from the wound, the wound is initially oversown and a lumbar drain is instituted for 72 hours.
如果仍有脑脊液流出，则行二次手术探查伤口并“水密”缝合硬膜、肌肉和皮肤各层。	If CSF continues to drain from the wound despite these measures, the patient is returned to the operating room for wound exploration and “water-tight” closure of the dura, muscle, and skin layers.
· 舌咽神经痛是一种发生于舌咽、迷走神经之耳支和咽支所支配区域的，以阵发性、针刺样剧痛为特征的罕见疼痛性病变。	Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is a rare cranial nerve hyperactivity disorder characterized by severe, lancinating, paroxysmal pain in the areas supplied by the auricular and pharyngeal branches of CN’s IX and X.
· 与其他颅神经的疼痛症状可存在重叠；因此，应结合病史、查体、扳机点、影像学检查和神经阻滞等一切手段，尽力明确诊断。	Symptoms of various cranial neuralgias can overlap; hence, every possible effort should be made to reach a correct diagnosis based on history, physical examination, trigger points, imaging studies, and nerve blocks.
误诊将导致误治，为医患双方造成损害。	Incorrect diagnosis will lead to erroneous treatment and result in frustration for both patient and surgeon.
· 作者的经验为，舌咽神经切断术联合迷走神经减压术是治疗舌咽神经痛安全有效的术式。	I have found transection of CN IX and decompression of CN X effective for safe relief of GN.
· 牵拉小脑的方向应平行于舌咽神经，以避免对前庭蜗神经造成牵拉导致听力受损。	The cerebellum should be retracted only parallel to the direction of CN IX to avoid traction on CN VIII, leading to hearing loss.
锐性松解蛛网膜和有策略地动态牵拉小脑，有助于小脑的移位，并减少颅神经损伤的风险。	Sharp arachnoid dissection and strategic dynamic cerebellar retraction will facilitate cerebellar mobilization without placing the cranial nerves at risk.
这些操作有利于对下段脑干内侧部的充分暴露，从而可实现对责任血管袢的安全移位和Teflon棉的置入。	These maneuvers will allow adequate exposure of the medial lower brainstem to allow safe mobilization of the offending vascular loop and Teflon implantation.
膝状神经痛	Geniculate Neuralgia
膝状神经痛（Geniculate neuralgia）也被称为中间神经痛（nervus intermedius neuralgia）或者原发性耳痛（primary otalgia），是一种十分罕见的面部神经性疼痛类型，以疼痛定位于耳深部、呈间歇性发作、发作持续数秒或数分钟为特征。	Geniculate neuralgia, also called nervus intermedius neuralgia or primary otalgia, is a very rare type of facial neuralgia characterized by intermittent episodes of pain located deep in the ear and lasting for seconds or minutes.
这种神经痛综合征常常被外耳道后壁的感觉或机械刺激所触发。	This neuralgic syndrome is often triggered by sensory or mechanical stimulation of the posterior wall of the external auditory canal.
迄今为止，该病在英文文献中所报道的病例数不到150例，因此关于其发病率、诊断和治疗方面的精确数据仍然不可知。	Fewer than 150 cases of this disorder have been reported in the English literature, so accurate data about prevalence, diagnosis, and treatment are not available.
中间神经的命名正是由于其位于面神经和前庭上神经之间而来。	The nervus intermedius takes its name from its intermediate position between the facial and superior vestibular nerves.
1563年其首次被发现，1977年Heinrich August Wrisberg将之命名为“portio media inter comunicantem faciei et nervum auditorium（面听神经之间的神经）”。	It was first identified in 1563, and in 1777, Heinrich August Wrisberg named it the “portio media inter comunicantem faciei et nervum auditorium” .
其被称为Wrisberg神经，包含支配泪腺和鼻腭腺的副交感纤维，以及来自舌和外耳及鼻子不同皮肤区域的感觉传入纤维。	This nerve, often called the Wrisberg nerve, carries parasympathetic fibers to the lacrimal and nasopalatine glands and transmits sensory information from the tongue and various skin areas of the nose and concha of the ear.
其伴行于面神经的运动纤维，被认为是面神经的一部分。	It travels alongside the motor component of the facial nerve and is considered part of this nerve.
中间神经包含来源于三个不同核团的纤维：1.来自上泌涎核的副交感纤维；2.去往延髓味觉核团（孤束核上极）的感觉纤维；3.去往三叉神经脊束背侧部的皮肤感觉纤维。	The nervus intermedius consists of fibers derived from three distinct nuclei: 1) parasympathetic secretory fibers from the superior salivary nucleus, 2) sensory fibers from the gustatory (superior pole of the solitary nucleus) nucleus in the medulla, and 3) fibers for cutaneous sensation from the dorsal part of the trigeminal tract.
副交感传出纤维行经膝状神经节，在此处换元或不换元，随后经岩浅大神经，最终支配舌下腺、下颌下唾液腺以及主泪腺和副泪腺。	The parasympathetic efferent fibers pass to the geniculate ganglion, with or without synapses at the ganglion, before innervating the sublingual and submandibular salivary glands, as well as the main and ancillary lacrimal glands, via the superior petrosal nerve.
特殊感觉传入纤维负责将来自舌前2/3、口底和部分上颚等处味觉感受器的神经冲动，经鼓索传至孤束核。	The special sensory afferent fibers bring impulses from the taste receptors located in the anterior two-thirds of the tongue, the floor of the mouth, and part of the palate, via the chorda tympani, to the solitary nucleus.
皮肤的躯体传入纤维传递来自耳廓、耳后、外耳道后壁和鼓膜外层等处感觉接收器的神经冲动。	The cutaneous somatic afferent fibers bring impulses from the sensory receptors located in the concha of the auricle, behind the ear, in the posterior wall of the external auditory canal, and in the outer layer of the tympanic membrane.
中间神经和面神经运动支的行程可分为脑池部、内听道部、迷路部和颅外部。	The course of the nervus intermedius and the motor root of the facial nerve can be divided into cisternal, meatal, labyrinthal, and extracranial parts.
根据与面听神经的关系，中间神经可分为三段，每段的平均长度约为2cm。	The average length of each of the three segments is approximately 2 cm.
第一段紧贴前庭蜗神经的根部，第二段独立走行于面听神经之间，第三段在内听道内加入面神经运动根。	The first segment adheres to the vestibulocochlear nerve at the nerve root; the second segment runs separately between cranial nerves (CN’s) VII and VIII; and the third segment joins the motor root of the facial nerve within the internal auditory canal.
目前尚不存在能用于确诊膝状神经痛的影像学及其他检查措施，因此该病如同其它颅神经压迫综合征一样，其确诊主要依赖临床症状。	Diagnosis of geniculate neuralgia, like other cranial nerve compression syndromes, is strictly clinical because no imaging or testing modality has been found to reliably reach the diagnosis.
尽管膝状神经痛的临床表现变化多端，但其特征性表现为突发的以耳为中心的阵发性刺痛。	Although the clinical presentation of geniculate neuralgia is varied, it classically manifests as acute paroxysmal stabbing pain centered within the ear.
疼痛部位可包括外耳道、耳廓、耳后区域，甚至软腭，有时可放射至颞区或者下颌角。	It may be localized in the auditory canal, pinna, retroauricular region, or even the soft palate, and may sometimes radiate to the temporal region or the angle of the mandible.
疼痛可能被感觉或者机械刺激所触发，例如淋浴时的水、气流，或者其它触及外耳道后壁皮肤的刺激。	The pain may be triggered by sensory or mechanical stimuli such as water in the shower, a breeze of air, or other cutaneous stimuli touching the posterior wall of the auditory canal.
伴随症状可包括泪腺、味觉和唾液腺的功能障碍。	The pain may be associated with disorders of lacrimation, gustatory sensation, and salivation.
诊断必须排外所有其它可能引起耳部疼痛的非神经痛性病因，包括：外耳或中耳炎；耳廓、外耳道、颞骨或鼻咽的恶性肿瘤；牙科病变；颞下颌关节疾病；血管性病变；鼻咽和喉部的病变；桥小脑角区的颅内病变；其他罕见的综合征如Eagle综合征（茎突过长综合征）。	For a correct diagnosis, all other possible non-neuralgic causes of otalgia must be eliminated. These include otitis externa or media; a malignancy of the pinna, external auditory canal, temporal bone, or nasopharynx; lesions of dental origin; temporomandibular joint diseases; vascular lesions; referred pain from nasopharyngeal and laryngeal lesions; intracranial lesions in the cerebellopontine angle; and rare syndromes such as Eagle syndrome.
因此，必须完善详尽的神经病学、牙科学和耳鼻喉科学的检查。	Therefore, thorough neurologic, dental, and other comprehensive otolaryngological examinations must be performed.
膝状神经痛与其它神经性疼痛的鉴别也很重要。	It is also important to differentiate geniculate neuralgia from other forms of neuralgia.
耳的感觉由第V、VII、IX和X对颅神经以及第2、第3颈神经支配，因此该病与其它面部神经性疼痛相重叠的情况并不罕见。	The sensation of the ear is supplied by CN’s V, VII, IX, and X, as well as by the 2nd and 3rd cervical nerves, so it is not uncommon to see an overlap among other facial neuralgias.
最需要鉴别的是三叉神经痛和舌咽神经痛。	The two most likely differential diagnoses of geniculate neuralgia are trigeminal neuralgia and glossopharyngeal neuralgia.
这些疼痛的性质可非常相似，唯有根据疼痛的部位和分布以资鉴别。	Characteristics of the pain can be similar to those of geniculate neuralgia—only the location and distribution of the pain enable a reliable differentiation between them.
对疑似膝状神经痛的患者，必须进行桥小脑角区的薄扫MRI扫描，	As part of the diagnostic workup when assessing a patient with suspected geniculate neuralgia, a fine-cut magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the cerebellopontine angle must be obtained.
由此明确是否存在压迫面听神经束的血管袢。	This may identify a vascular loop compressing the CN VII/VIII Complex.
其它的检查包括纯音测听、听觉脑干诱发电位、前庭功能检查等，由此排除其它原因的耳痛。	Other tests that may help exclude other causes of otalgia include pure tone audiometry, auditory evoked brainstem responses, and vestibular function tests.
手术指证	Indications for Surgery
需要再次强调的是大多数有顽固性耳痛的患者并不是膝状神经痛。	It is important to re-emphasize that most patient with intractable ear pain do not have geniculate neuralgia.
作者对膝状神经痛的患者进行手术干预是非常谨慎的，患者的筛选最为重要。	I am very selective in offering operative interventions to patients suffering from geniculate neuralgia. Experience is paramount in selection of appropriate candidates.
膝状神经痛的首选治疗是药物治疗，手术只作为药物治疗无效后的选择。	The first-line treatment for geniculate neuralgia is medical therapy, with surgery reserved for refractory cases.
常用的药物包括卡马西平、加巴喷丁和拉莫三嗪。	Commonly used medications include carbamazepine, gabapentin, and lamotrigine.
因为每种药物的药效特点不同，所以联合用药可能对那些进行标准疗程的单药治疗后无效的患者有益。	As these drugs affect different sites of action, combination drug therapy may benefit patients who are nonresponsive to standard regimens of single-drug therapy.
另一种药物治疗的替代选择是局部神经阻滞。	An alternative to medical therapy is regional nerve blocks.
手术操作	Surgical Procedure
在出现药物不耐受、无效、过敏、副作用等情况下可以考虑手术。	Surgical options can be considered in situations of drug intolerance, inefficacy, allergies, or side effects.
最常见的两种手术方式为中间神经脑池段切断术和神经根入脑干区的微血管减压术。	The two most common surgical procedures include transection of the intracisternal segment of the nervus intermedius and microvascular decompression (MVD) of the nerve at its root entry zone near the brainstem.
作者倾向于采用经乳突后开颅行中间神经脑池段切除的术式。	I prefer sectioning the cisternal segment of the nervus intermedius through a retromastoid craniotomy.
以下将对此进行阐述。	The following discussion describes the methodology.
术前考虑	Preoperative Considerations
如上所述，必须在术前进行详尽的耳鼻喉科检查以排除所有其他病因。	As stated above, a comprehensive otolaryngological work-up is necessary to exclude all other causes for geniculate neuralgia and must be completed before operative intervention is offered to the patient.
此病属于神经性疼痛，而非神经病理性疼痛。	The pain should be neuralgic and not neuropathic.
由于对前庭蜗神经的操作可导致术后出现顽固性眩晕，所以手术应仅限于“确诊”的患者。	The risk of postoperative intractable vertigo due to manipulation of CN VIII is significant, and therefore only patients with “certain” diagnosis should undergo surgery.
存在皮肤扳机点是必要的一条手术指征。	Cutaneous triggers are mandatory for consideration of surgery.
术中应该常规监测听觉脑干诱发电位。	Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) should be routinely monitored intraoperatively.
下列图像展示了相关的手术解剖。	The following images demonstrate the relevant operative anatomy.
图1：右侧乙状窦后入路显露桥小脑角内的颅神经（A）。	Figure 1: Exposure of the cranial nerves within the cerebellopontine angle after a right-sided retrosigmoid approach (A).
中间神经位于前庭上神经和面神经之间（B）。	The nervus intermedius is located between the superior vestibular nerve and the facial nerve (B).
另一视角显示中间神经（C）。	Another view of the nervus intermedius is demonstrated (C).
分开前庭上和前庭下神经以暴露面神经和蜗神经（D）。	The superior and inferior vestibular nerves have been divided to expose the facial and cochlear nerves (D).
小脑前下动脉（AICA）的迷路支可清晰显露（图片由AL  Rhoton,Jr授权）。	A labyrinthine branch of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) is also apparent (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图2：左侧乙状窦后的显露。	Figure 2: Left retrosigmoid exposure.
注意前庭上和前庭下神经之间的裂隙（C）。	Note the cleavage plane between the superior and inferior vestibular nerves (C).
内听道后面观（D）。	Posterior view of the internal auditory canal (D).
注意中间神经和面神经之间的密切联系。	Note the intimate relationship of the nervus intermedius with the facial nerve.
内听道内各神经的放大观（E）。	An enlarged view of the nerves within the meatus (E).
扩大前庭上和前庭下神经之间的裂隙以显现各神经束（F）（图片由AL  Rhoton,Jr授权）。	The cleavage plane between the superior and inferior vestibular nerves has been extended to visualize individual nerve bundles (F)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
中间神经切断术	NERVUS INTERMEDIUS TRANSECTION
中间神经切断术的乳突后开颅方式与三叉神经痛微血管减压术者相同。	The retromastoid craniotomy for nervus intermedius sectioning is the same as the one for microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia.
作者采用小脑上外侧入路来暴露面听神经束的上表面。	I use the supralateral cerebellar approach to expose the superior aspect of the CN VII/VIII complex.
对这一入路的详细描述请参考乳突后开颅术一章。	Please refer to the chapter on Retromastoid Craniotomy for a detailed description of the approach.
作者采用小脑上外侧入路显露中间神经。	I use the supralateral cerebellar corridor to access the nervus intermedius.
图4：C型切口可广泛切开硬膜以利于暴露第V至X对颅神经。	Figure 4: The C-shaped dural incision allows a wide opening to explore CN’s V-X.
鉴于膝状神经痛、三叉神经痛和舌咽神经痛之间存在显著的重叠，作者的手术理念是对中间神经行切断术的同时，探查三叉、舌咽和迷走神经而行必要的MVD术。	There is a significant overlap among the pain syndromes of geniculate neuralgia, trigeminal neuralgia, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Consequently, my operative philosophy for geniculate neuralgia is to explore CN V for MVD, section the nervus intermedius, and explore CN’s IX and X for MVD.
关于如何暴露第V至X对颅神经的相关细节，已经在MVD治疗三叉神经痛和MVD治疗面肌痉挛的章节中讨论过。	The relevant details of exposure for the CN’s V-X have been previously discussed in the chapters of MVD for Trigeminal Neuralgia and Hemifacial Spasm.
从橡胶手套剪取一块（比棉片稍大）作为缓冲垫，隔着该橡胶片沿小脑表面深入时，可避免粗糙的棉片对小脑的摩擦。	A piece of glove (cut slightly larger than the cottonoid patty) acts as a rubber dam. It protects the cerebellar hemisphere against the rough surface of the cottonoid as the rubber dam slides over the cerebellum while dissection is continued to expose the cerebellopontine angle.
辨认岩骨与后颅窝底的转折后，于此处隔着橡胶片将棉片朝向三叉神经下表面和面听神经上表面进一步深入。	I identify the junction of the petrous bone and tentorium and advance the cottonoid over the rubber dam near the turn of the petrous bone toward the lower aspect of CN V and upper aspect of CN VII/VIII.
应避免平行于面听神经向内侧牵拉小脑，以防间接牵拉神经。	Medial retraction of the cerebellum parallel to CN VII/VIII complex is avoided to prevent direct transmission of retraction to these nerves.
小脑牵拉方向应平行于三叉神经和舌咽神经。	The alternating intermittent vectors of retraction are parallel to CN’s V and IX.
图5：暴露第V至X对颅神经之后，首先探查三叉神经入脑干区，排除可能存在的责任血管袢。	Figure 5: After exposure of CN’s V-X, first, the root entry zone of the trigeminal nerve is examined thoroughly to exclude the presence of any convincing compressive arterial loop.
如果未见任何责任动脉，作者则认为一些引发神经色泽改变的大静脉可能是潜在的责任血管。	If there is no offending arterial loop, I consider the large veins causing discoloration on the nerve to potentially be the source of the neurovascular conflict.
图6：暴露和探查左侧三叉神经入脑干区的术中图片（上图）。	Figure 6: Intraoperative images demonstrating exposure and inspection of the left trigeminal nerve root entry zone (top image).
探查面听神经上、下水平的脑干以明确任何明显的血管压迫（下图）。	The brainstem at the level of the superior and inferior aspects of CN’s VII/VIII is then examined for any obvious compressive vessel (bottom image).
下一步骤请看下方的图片C和D。	Please see images C and D below for the next steps.
图7：高倍镜下用一细剥离子，小心轻柔地移动前庭蜗神经或面神经，以探查位于两者边缘的中间神经，后者应该位于前庭上神经和面神经之间。	Figure 7: Using a fine dissector under magnification, I carefully and gently mobilize CN’s VII or VIII and look around their edges for the nervus intermedius, which should be located between the superior vestibular and facial nerves.
任何对前庭神经的过度操作都会大大增加术后致残性眩晕和平衡障碍的风险。	Any significant manipulation of the vestibular nerves will significantly increase the risk of disabling postoperative vertigo and balance dysfunction.
图8：大多数情况下，作者通过一尖端呈球形的细剥离子，可沿面听神经下缘，于两者之间探及中间神经。	Figure 8: Most often, I find the nervus intermedius between and along the inferior aspect of the CN VII/VIII complex using a fine ball-tipped dissector.
中间神经常由1~4股细支组成。	This nerve often consists of 1-4 fine strands.
蜗神经需予以听觉脑干诱发电位仔细监测。	The cochlear nerve is carefully tracked using BAERs monitoring.
图9：通过球形尖端剥离子从面听神经束中暴露并分离中间神经的术中图片。	Figure 9: This intraoperative view illustrates exposure of the nervus intermedius and its separation from the CN VII/VIII complex using a ball-tipped dissector.
图10：随后用显微剪刀剪断中间神经。	Figure 10: The nervus intermedius is then divided using microscissors.
细剥离器可在中间神经被剪断时将其远离面听神经。	A fine dissector keeps the nerve away from CN’s VII/VIII while it is cut.
图11：一旦中间神经被切断，建议探查面听神经附近的脑干面，以确保没有压迫神经的责任血管。	Figure 11: Once the nervus intermedius is divided, it is advisable to ensure that no offending vascular loop is abutting the CN VII/VIII complex near the brainstem.
若发现责任血管袢，需垫入碎Teflon棉片将其全程移位。	If a vascular loop is identified, it is mobilized along its entire length using multiple pieces of shredded Teflon.
对舌咽、迷走神经的入脑干区的任何责任血管进行移位也很重要。	It is important to mobilize any offending vessels along the root exit zones of CN’s IX-X as well (inset).
舌咽神经痛的非典型形式可能表现为膝状神经痛。	Atypical forms of glossopharyngeal neuralgia may present as geniculate neuralgia.
图12：此术中图片显示在责任血管袢和面听神经束之间垫入了碎Teflon棉片。	Figure 12: This intraoperative view discloses placement of pieces of shredded Teflon implant between the offending vascular loop and CN’s VII-X.
作者认为并不需要“水密”缝合硬脑膜，微血管减压术后发生脑脊液漏的概率仍非常低。	I do not routinely perform a watertight dural closure and have experienced a very low rate of cerebrospinal fluid leakage through the incision or the nose.
对于乳突气房应再次用骨蜡充分封闭（“wax in, wax out”），随后将骨瓣回纳或用材料修补。	Mastoid air cells are rewaxed thoroughly (“wax in, wax out”) and the bone flap is replaced or a methyl methacrylate cranioplasty is performed.
分层缝合肌肉及皮肤。	The muscle and scalp are closed in anatomic layers.
关于关颅的更多细节，请参考乳突后开颅术一章。	Please refer to the Retromastoid Craniotomy chapter for more details regarding closure.
术后注意	Postoperative Considerations
患者术后入住监护室观察一晚，重点关注血流动力学改变，神经查体及伤口护理，病情平稳后转入普通病房。	After surgery, patients are usually admitted to the ICU for an overnight observation and then transferred to the regular ward for a couple of days before they can be discharged home. Special attention should be paid to hemodynamic parameters, neurologic examination, and wound care.
已经报道的中间神经切断术的副作用包括泪腺、唾液腺及味觉功能的减退。	Reported side effects of nervus intermedius sectioning include decreases in lacrimation, salivation, and taste.
术后眩晕可能发生并且可能是致残性的，需要康复治疗。	Postoperative vertigo may occur and may be disabling, requiring rehabilitation therapy.
对于术前进行合适筛选的患者，大多数都能实现疼痛的缓解。	Most patients will have relief of their pain if they were appropriately selected for surgery.
●  膝状或中间神经痛是一种十分罕见的面部神经性疼痛类型，以疼痛定位于耳深部、呈间歇性发作、发作持续数秒或数分钟为特征。这种神经痛综合征常常被外耳道后壁的感觉或机械刺激所触发。	Geniculate or nervus intermedius neuralgia is a rare type of facial neuralgia characterized by intermittent episodes of pain located deep in the ear that last for seconds or minutes, and often triggered by sensory or mechanical stimulation of the posterior wall of the external auditory canal.
●  膝状神经痛的症状可与三叉神经痛和舌咽神经痛相重叠，应通过详尽的耳鼻喉科检查以排除耳、颞下颌关节和鼻咽部的病变。	The symptoms of geniculate neuralgia overlap with those of trigeminal and glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Pathologies of the ear, temporomandibular joint, and nasopharynx should be ruled out through otolaryngological consultation.
●  应避免平行于前庭蜗神经的方向牵拉小脑。	Retraction of the cerebellum parallel to the path of CN VIII should be minimized.
这些操作有利于充分暴露以实现对颅神经的安全探查和中间神经的切断。	These maneuvers will allow adequate exposure to permit safe inspection of the cranial nerves and sectioning of the nervus intermedius.
应注意探查第V至X对颅神经的入/处脑干区。	The root entry/exit zones of CN’s V-X should be inspected.
梅尼埃病	Meniere’s Disease
梅尼埃病的特征是阵发性眩晕、波动性低频听力下降和耳鸣。	Meniere’s disease is characterized by episodic vertigo, fluctuating hearing loss for low frequencies, and tinnitus.
根据19世纪Prosper Meniere医生提出的疾病最初表现,AAO-HNS（美国耳鼻喉头颈外科学会）制定了梅尼埃病的诊断标准。	Diagnostic criteria for the condition have been established by the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (AAO-HNS) based on the initial characteristics of the disease set forth by Prosper Meniere in the 19th century.
梅尼埃病的诊断主要依赖临床症状，AAO-HNS根据一系列标准将诊断制定“潜在性梅尼埃病”到“确立性梅尼埃病”。	Meniere’s is a purely clinical diagnosis, and the guidelines set by the AAO-HNS can tailor the diagnosis to range from “possible” to “certain” based on a number of criteria.
“确立性梅尼埃病“的标准包括两次或两次以上典型的自发性眩晕发作，每次发作持续超过20分钟，纯音测听检查为波动性听力下降，耳鸣或患侧耳闷胀感，组织病理学诊断为膜迷路积水。	Criteria for “certain” Meniere’s include two or more definite and spontaneous episodes of vertigo lasting longer than 20 minutes, fluctuating hearing loss documented by pure tone audiometry, tinnitus or fullness in the affected ear, and histopathologic confirmation of endolymphatic hydrops.
诊断标准的变化和与其他疾病重叠的症状使单纯依赖临床表现做出可靠诊断难度增加。	The vagaries in the criteria and the overlap of symptoms with other disorders create a challenge for the clinician attempting to establish a reliable diagnosis of Meniere’s on clinical grounds alone.
和梅尼埃病相似的疾病包括：良性阵发性位置性眩晕，前庭神经炎和迷路炎等。	Other conditions that can mimic Meniere’s disease include benign positional vertigo, vestibular neuritis, and labyrinthitis.
梅尼埃病的病理生理学基础是膜迷路积水。	Pathophysiologically, Meniere’s disease results from distension of the endolymphatic spaces or endolymphatic hydrops.
慢性梅尼埃病可能出现迷路纤维化。	Fibrosis of the labyrinth can occur in chronic cases.
当高钾内淋巴液渗透到低钾外淋巴液时，前庭神经末梢去极化导致眩晕发作。	When the potassium-rich endolymph leaks into the potassium-deprived perilymph, vertiginous attacks appear due to depolarization of the vestibular nerve endings.
膜迷路积水有很多原因，包括内淋巴液产生增多和吸收障碍，离子失衡，基因缺陷，病毒感染，自主神经功能失调，饮食因素，自身免疫反应，血管反应异常和过敏反应。	Many factors may contribute to the development of hydrops of the endolymphatic sac, including increased endolymph production and decreased endolymph absorption, ionic imbalance, genetic abnormalities, viral infection, autonomic imbalance, dietary factors, autoimmune reactions, vascular irregularities, and allergic responses.
梅尼埃病的诊断刚开始主要排除其他原因引起的眩晕症状。	The diagnostic workup for Meniere’s primarily focuses on eliminating other causes for the patient’s symptoms.
前庭功能障碍的患者都要进行纯音测听，并动态观察听力改变，尤其是主要影响低频听力的感音神经性听力下降。	Baseline pure tone audiogram scores should be obtained for every patient who has symptoms of vestibular dysfunction. These can be followed over time to assess fluctuations in hearing function, especially sensorineural hearing loss that preferentially affects the lower frequencies.
另外，病人应该进行言语识别率测试，声导抗测试和眼震电图。	In addition, speech discrimination scores, tympanometry, and electronystagmography should be obtained.
影像学检查比如MRI（核磁共振）可以排除其他病因比如肿瘤或脱髓鞘性病变。	Imaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can rule out other causes of Meniere’s disease such as neoplastic or demyelinating disorders.
血液检查可以排除血液疾病。	Blood tests may be performed to rule out vasculitic conditions.
耳鼻咽喉头颈外科医生常常负责这些病人的筛选，初步诊疗和手术治疗。	Our otolaryngologist colleagues are often responsible for patient selection and the initial medical and surgical therapy for these patients.
梅尼埃病的初步治疗同时采用两种方法：急性期症状的控制和眩晕发作的预防。	The initial treatment for Meniere’s follows a two-pronged approach: control of acute symptoms and prevention of further attacks.
梅尼埃病的急性发作症状包括眩晕，耳鸣和听力下降。	Acute attacks of Meniere’s, which consist of vertigo, tinnitus, and hearing fluctuations, can be treated with vestibular suppressants such as meclizine or promethazine.
前庭神经抑制剂比如美克洛嗪或异丙嗪可以控制急性发作，急诊处理时常常采用静脉输液。	Patients presenting to the emergency department are often treated with intravenous fluids.
降低发作频率的措施包括限盐和利尿，通常效果一般。	Interventions to help reduce the frequency of attacks are not very effective and include salt restriction and diuretic therapy.
大约10%的病人症状难以控制，可行化学性迷路切除术。	Approximately 10% of patients are refractory to best medical therapy and might benefit from ablative interventions.
其中一个方法是鼓室注射庆大霉素，庆大霉素是一种可以阻断内耳毛细胞信号的耳毒性药物。	One such intervention is intratympanic injection of gentamicin, an ototoxic agent that has been shown to block cell signaling in the hair cells of the inner ear.
最近一项荟萃分析发现，使用该种疗法，75%的病人的眩晕症状得到完全控制，93%得到基本控制。	A recent meta-analysis found that approximately 75% and 93% of patients experience complete or substantial control, respectively, of the vertiginous symptoms with this therapy.
应用以上治疗依然无效的病人可以考虑手术治疗。	Patients who do not benefit from these therapies are considered candidates for a number of surgical options.
和三叉神经痛患者的手术治疗一样，手术治疗病人的选择是至关重要的。	Patient selection is absolutely crucial, as with surgery for trigeminal neuralgia.
没有传统性特异性症状的病人是不能从手术干预中获益的。	Patients without classic, specific symptoms are unlikely to benefit from surgical intervention.
梅尼埃病的手术治疗方法最初包括以下几种：1）内淋巴囊分流术，通过引流内淋巴到蛛网膜下腔或外淋巴腔进行内淋巴囊减压；2）迷路切除术，这是可以在全麻下操作的相对较小的手术。	The initial surgical techniques for treatment of Meniere’s disease include the following: 1) endolymphatic sac shunting, which allows decompression of the endolymphatic sac by its drainage into the subarachnoid or the perilymphatic space; and 2) labyrinthotomy, a relatively minor procedure that can be performed under general anesthesia.
迷路切除术破坏了耳蜗管和螺旋板，所以也损伤了听力。	Labyrinthotomy disrupts the cochlear duct and spiral lamina and thus disrupts hearing as well.
迷路切除术更常用于治疗梅尼埃病，该手术切开外侧半规管，切除前庭，损伤听力。	The more commonly performed labyrinthectomy can also treat Meniere’s disease; in this procedure the lateral semicircular canal is opened and the vestibule is drilled away. This procedure naturally disrupts hearing function.
前庭神经切断术或前庭神经切除术是缓解难治性梅尼埃病最常见的神经外科手术，该手术入路可以经迷路、经迷路后或乙状窦后。	Vestibular neurotomy or neurectomy is now the most common neurosurgical procedure for relieving intractable Meniere’s disease, and it has been performed through a translabyrinthine, retrolabyrinthine, or retrosigmoid route.
前庭神经切断术的最佳手术入路依然备受争议。	The best approach used to section the vestibular nerve remains a matter of debate.
1961年，House描述了经颅中窝切断前庭上、下神经的手术方法，但是这种方法由于具有耳聋和面部肌肉无力的高风险已经被废弃了。	Historically, in 1961, House described the middle cranial fossa approach to section the inferior and superior vestibular nerves, but this approach has been abandoned because of the heightened risk of deafness and facial weakness.
1978年Norrel和Silverstein提出迷路后入路方法，1986年Silverstein对其修改为仅包括乙状窦后入路方法。	The retrolabyrinthine approach was described by Norrel and Silverstein in 1978 and modified by Silverstein in 1986 to include only the retrosigmoid approach.
美国耳鼻喉头颈外科学会制定了梅尼埃病的诊断指南。	The American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery has established specific guidelines for diagnosis of Meniere’s disease.
根据临床特征和组织病理学特征，梅尼埃病的诊断分为确立性梅尼埃病、限定性梅尼埃病、怀疑性梅尼埃病、潜在性梅尼埃病。	Based on the number of clinical and histopathologic features present, the diagnosis of Meniere’s disease is classified into certain, definitive, probable, or possible.
“确立性梅尼埃病”诊断要求组织病理学诊断，所以大多数病人归类到“限定性梅尼埃病”诊断。	A “certain” diagnosis requires a histopathologic diagnosis, and most patients fall into the “definitive” category.
“限定性梅尼埃病“的诊断包括两次或两次以上典型的自发性眩晕发作，每次持续20分钟或更久，至少一次纯音测听为听力下降，患侧耳鸣或耳闷胀感，排除其他疾病。	A “definitive” diagnosis of Meniere’s disease requires two or more spontaneous vertiginous episodes of 20 minutes or longer and audiometrically documented hearing loss on one occasion, tinnitus or aural fullness in the affected ear, and all other causes excluded.
医生应该询问患者眩晕的性质，听力损失和耳闷胀感的主观感觉，眩晕发作的诱因，耳部手术史，外伤史，以及耳毒性药物的使用史。	Patients should be queried about the nature of vertigo, subjective feeling of hearing loss and aural fullness, precipitating factors for the onset of vertiginous episodes, prior history of ear surgeries, trauma, and use of ototoxic medications.
梅尼埃病和良性阵发性位置性眩晕的鉴别非常重要。	It is very important to differentiate between Meniere’s disease and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.
后者没有听力损失。	There is no hearing loss evident with the latter.
神经系统检查发现的任何中枢损伤都应该通过影像学检查进行排除。	Any focal finding on the neurologic exam suggests a central lesion that needs to be excluded by imaging.
如果病人有眼球震颤，医生应进一步区分中枢性和外周性眼球震颤。	If the patient is suffering from nystagmus, the physician should attempt to differentiate between central and peripheral nystagmus.
具体的耳部和前庭功能检查由耳鼻喉科医生完成，本文不作讨论。	Detailed otologic and vestibular exams are performed by our otolaryngologist colleagues and are beyond the scope of this text.
目前，梅尼埃病没有可以称作金标准的检查以便得到令人满意的高敏感性高特异性的可靠诊断。	No gold standard test exists at this time that can reliably diagnose Meneire’s disease with satisfactory sensitivity and specificity.
然而，医生可以排除代谢异常，感染和激素异常。	However, the treating physician should be able to rule out metabolic, infectious, and hormonal abnormalities.
尿检是否有蛋白尿和血尿，排除肾耳综合征。	The patient’s urine should be tested for proteinuria and hematuria to rule out oto-renal syndrome.
通过VDRL（梅毒血清试验）和荧光螺旋体抗体实验排除神经梅毒和莱姆病。	Neurosyphilis and Lyme disease may be excluded by checking Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) tests and a fluorescent treponemal antibody test;
这些疾病的症状和梅尼埃病类似。	symptoms for these conditions can closely mimic Meniere’s disease.
听力测试是诊断的一线检查。	Audiologic testing by audiometry is a first-line investigation to establish the diagnosis.
传统观点认为，梅尼埃病的听力损失是“波动性、低频的、感音神经性”损失，若病因不能消除则病情加重。	Classically, the hearing loss in Meniere’s disease is described as “fluctuating, low-frequency sensorineural” loss that might progress if the underlying problem is not promptly addressed.
前庭神经抑制剂使用后两周，进行眼震电图（ENG）测试，包括动眼神经功能测试和热量和位置测试。	Electronystagmography (ENG) may be performed after a 2-week holiday from any vestibular suppressant and includes oculomotor evaluation as well as caloric and positional tests.
耳蜗电图（ECoG）是另一个诊断工具，描记声音刺激产生的总电位和动作电位的比率。	Electrocochleography (ECoG) is another diagnostic tool that measures the ratio of the summating potential to action potential in response to an auditory stimulus.
若兴奋期比率超过35%，诊断为梅尼埃病。	A ratio of greater than 35% during an active episode is indicative of Meniere’s disease.
最近出现的新技术可能有利于准确诊断。	Recently new techniques have emerged that may help the physician reach a correct diagnosis.
比如前庭诱发肌电位（VEMP），耳蜗积水分析屏蔽程序（CHAMPs）和鼓室注射钆24小时后3D FLAIR序列MRI。	These include vestibular-evoked myogenic potential (VEMP), cochlear hydrops analysis masking procedures (CHAMPs), and 3D FLAIR sequence MRI obtained 24 hours after an intratympanic injection of gadolinium.
有很多疾病和梅尼埃病相似。	A long list of differential pathologies closely mimic Meniere’s disease.
听神经瘤，内淋巴囊肿瘤，多发性硬化症和短暂性脑缺血发作可以通过MRI排除。	Acoustic neuroma, endolymphatic sac tumor, multiple sclerosis, and transient ischemic attacks can be ruled out with the help of MRI.
有偏头痛病史的病人考虑前庭性偏头痛。	Migraine-associated vertigo is a consideration among patients with a history of migraine headaches.
糖尿病和甲状腺疾病也可以导致部分类似梅尼埃病的症状。	Even diabetes and thyroid disease can cause symptoms that overlap with those of Meniere’s disease.
Cogan综合征是发生在年轻人的慢性炎症性疾病，有类似梅尼埃病的前庭和听觉症状，但该病表现为累及眼部的系统性血管炎。	Cogan's syndrome is a chronic inflammatory condition in young adults that has vestibuloauditory symptoms similar to those of Meniere’s disease, but patients with this condition manifest eye involvement and systemic vasculitis.
梅尼埃病的任何治疗目标都是控制疾病进展，降低眩晕发作和听力损失的频率和严重度。	The goals of any treatment for Meniere’s disease are to reduce the frequency and severity of vertigo attacks and hearing loss while preventing disease progression.
梅尼埃病的治疗首先是调整生活方式，比如减少焦虑、避免摄入高盐、咖啡因、酒精、尼古丁和谷氨酸钠。	The first steps in treatment include lifestyle adjustments such as managing stress, and avoiding high sodium intake, caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, and monosodium glutamate.
利尿剂和倍他司丁可以减少膜迷路积水，缓解症状。	Diuretics and betahistine may reduce endolymphatic hydrops and improve symptoms.
难治性患者中大约有10%的患者适合进行迷路切除或非迷路切除手术。	Approximately 10% of patients with refractory symptoms are eligible for one of the nonablative or ablative surgical procedures.
非切除性手术包括内淋巴囊操作（包括减压术和引流术）和球囊切开术，这类手术感音神经性听力损失的风险较低。	Nonablative procedures include endolymphatic sac procedures (enhancement or shunting) and sacculotomy, and are associated with a low risk of sensorineural hearing loss.
迷路切除包括鼓室注射庆大霉素，迷路切除术和前庭神经切断术。	Ablative procedures include intratympanic gentamicin, labyrinthectomy, and vestibular neurotomy.
前庭神经切断术可以使大约95%的患者症状缓解。	Vestibular neurotomy offers symptomatic relief in up to 95% of appropriately selected patients.
感音神经性听力损失的风险较低，是治疗梅尼埃病最安全有效的方法之一。	The procedure is associated with a low risk of sensorineural hearing loss and is one of the safest and most effective procedures to treat Meniere’s disease.
下面将描述乳突后颅骨切开行前庭神经切断术的个人经验。	The following offering describes my experience with vestibular nerve section (neurotomy) through a retromastoid craniotomy.
所有诊断为梅尼埃病的病人术前都应行听力测试和MRI。	All patients with a diagnosis of Meniere’s disease should undergo audiometric testing and MRI before surgery.
随着经验增加，术中不再常规检测面神经功能。	As my experience has grown, I have abandoned the practice of routinely monitoring the facial nerve intraoperatively.
但是，术中常规检测脑干听觉诱发反应（BAERs），把术后听力损失风险降到最小。	However, I do routinely monitor brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) to minimize the risk of postoperative hearing loss.
这种方式提醒术者在处理颅神经（CN）VII/VIII时采用动态牵拉。	This modality alerts me to adjust dynamic retraction during manipulation of the cranial nerve (CN) VII/VIII complex.
图1.乙状窦后进入后，暴露桥小脑角内的颅神经。	Figure 1: Exposure of the cranial nerves within the cerebellopontine angle after a right-sided retrosigmoid approach.
注意小脑前下动脉（AICA）和小脑后下动脉（PICA）与CN VII/VIII复合体的关系（A）。	Note the relationship of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) to the CN VII/VIII complex (A).
明确面听神经束内神经之间的关系是很重要的。	A clear understanding of the relationship of the nerves within the CN VII/VIII complex is important.
中间神经位于前庭上神经和面神经之间（B）。	The facial nerve is located anterior to the superior vestibular nerve (B).
另一视角显示中间神经（C）。	A cleavage plane developed between the cochlear nerve and the inferior vestibular nerve (C).
分开前庭上和前庭下神经以暴露面神经和蜗神经（D）。	The superior and inferior vestibular nerves were divided to expose the facial and cochlear nerves (D).
AICA的迷路支可清晰显露（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）	A labyrinthine branch of the AICA is also apparent (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图2. 左侧乙状窦后的显露。这些图片说明了前庭神经和面神经、蜗神经的位置关系。	Figure 2: These images demonstrate the location of the vestibular nerves in relationship to the facial and cochlear nerves.
注意蜗神经在CN VIII以下部分的特殊位置关系。（图片由AL  Rhoton,Jr授权）。	Note the specific location of the cochlear nerve along the inferior aspect of CN VIII (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
乳突后颅骨切开行前庭神经切断术类似三叉神经痛的微血管减压术。	The retromastoid craniotomy for vestibular nerve section is the same as the one for microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia.
术者的操作是经小脑上外侧入路暴露CN VII/VIII复合体。	I use the supralateral cerebellar approach to expose the CN VII/VIII complex.
暴露CN VIII的具体操作参照乳突后开颅术部分。	Please refer to the chapter on extended retromastoid craniotomy for a detailed description of the approach to CN VIII.
图3. 进入桥小脑角区手术路径：蓝色：三叉神经微血管减压术-小脑上外侧入路；绿色：面神经、舌咽神经减压术-小脑下外侧或绒球下入路。	Figure 3: The operative corridors and trajectories for accessing the cerebellopontine angle: The surgical corridors for microvascular decompression for trigeminal neuralgia (supralateral cerebellar approach-blue arrow) and hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia (infralateral cerebellar or infrafloccular approach-green arrow) are illustrated.
术者采用上外侧入路暴露CN VIII。	I use the supralateral cerebellar corridor to access CN VIII.
辨认岩骨与后颅窝底的转折后，于此处隔着橡胶片将棉片朝向后组颅神经进一步深入。	I identify the junction of the petrous bone and tentorium and advance the cottonoid over the rubber dam near the turn of the petrous bone toward the lower aspect of CN V and upper aspect of CN VII/VIII.
小脑牵拉方向应平行于舌咽神经。	The alternating vectors of retraction are parallel to CN’s V and IX.
图4.经右侧乳突后入路暴露右侧CN VII/VIII。	Figure 4: Exposure of the right CN VII/VIII complex through the right-sided retromastoid approach.
神经的前庭部分通常颜色比蜗神经深一些。	The vestibular component of the nerve is usually more grayish in color than the cochlear component.
两根神经之间通常有一根小动脉纵行。	An arteriole often delineates the demarcation line along these two components.
术中BAER监测可以指导外科医生调整小脑牵拉，减少CN VIII不必要的牵拉。	Intraoperative BAER monitoring guides the surgeon to adjust cerebellar retraction to minimize undue traction on CN VIII.
笔者会间断的向分离开的术野内打水以减少显微镜灯光对前庭蜗神经的热损伤。	I continue irrigating the field periodically during intradural dissection because the intense light of the microscope can cause heat injury to CN VIII.
如果前庭蜗神经完全暴露，则用浸有罂粟碱的明胶海绵覆盖神经表面以缓解血管痉挛。	I may also cover the inferior surface of CN VIII with a small piece of papaverine-soaked gelfoam to relieve vasospasm.
若在术中任何时刻出现BAERs的变化，术者会采取以下措施：	If the BAERs change at anytime during the intradual maneuvers, I perform the following steps:
1、停止分离和一切牵拉，并冲洗术野。	Stop dissection and relieve all retraction while irrigating the operative field.
2、等待数分钟至BAERs恢复正常。	Allow a few minutes for the BAERs to return to normal.
3、通常采用更为向上的牵拉，利用绒球下径路以最大程度地减少平行于面听神经束的牵拉。	I then attempt a more superior-to-inferior directed retraction while minimizing any traction parallel to the CN VII/VIII complex.
通常面神经前侧被遮盖，可以很好地避免被切除。	The facial nerve is usually concealed anteriorly, and it is generally best to avoid its dissection.
CN VII/VIII上的蛛网膜可以从中间显露，暴露CN VIII中两个部分之间的分隔板，优于靠近内听道口的操作。	The arachnoid membranes over the complex can be reflected medially. This maneuver allows better visualization of the plane between the two components of CN VIII, often better appreciated closer to the porus acusticus.
通过倾斜显微镜向上看CN V、向下看CN IX和X，是一个很好的操作。	It is a good practice to confirm the identity of the cranial nerve by angling the microscope to view up toward CN V and down toward CN’s IX and X.
一些外科医生喜欢磨开内耳道更多暴露CN VII/VIII复合物的外侧，然后暴露前庭神经支和蜗神经支之间的分隔板。	Some surgeons prefer to drill into the internal auditory canal to expose the complex more laterally and delineate the plane between the vestibular and cochlear branches.
笔者没有用过这种方法，因为大多数病人CN VIII各分支之间的界限在脑池内部分的外侧足够明显，没有必要磨开内耳道。	I have not used this technique because in most patients, the delineation between the branches of CN VIII is sufficiently apparent more laterally along their intracisternal segment, making drilling into the internal auditory canal unnecessary.
注意避免对于神经和相关血管的过度操作，避免损伤蜗神经及其血供，这一点很重要。	It is important to take great care to avoid excessive manipulation of the nerve complex and its associated vasculature to avoid injury to the cochlear nerve and its blood supply.
图5.用钝性倾斜细剥离子分离前庭神经和蜗神经。	Figure 5: Accessing the cleavage plane by using a blunt angled microdissector to separate the vestibular and cochlear divisions.
正常情况下可以找到分隔界面。	A reasonable plane can often be found.
图6.找到神经间的分隔界面后，用显微剪剪断前庭神经。	Figure 6: Once the plane within the nerve is identified, the vestibular portion is sectioned with microscissors.
神经断端收缩，CN VII出现在视野前方。	The edges of the cut nerve retract and CN VII comes into view anteriorly.
在切断前庭神经时，将显微剪的尖端向上，避免损伤腹侧的面神经。	While sectioning the vestibular nerve, I direct the tip of the microscissors superiorly to avoid damaging the ventrally located facial nerve.
一些操笔者认为应该切除部分前庭神经，防止神经功能再建。	Some operators advocate removing a portion of the vestibular nerve to avoid possible reinnervation.
图7.然后，用镰状刀确认所有的前庭神经纤维都已切断。	Figure 7: I then use a sickle knife to ensure that all the fibers of the vestibular nerve are transected.
完成前庭神经切断术后，可以看到迷路动脉。	Once the vestibular neurotomy is complete, the labyrinthine artery may become visible.
为了保护听力，这一动脉应避免过多操作。	Excessive manipulation of this important artery should be avoided to preserve hearing.
图8.很容易发现CN VIII的下半部分外包绕着神经鞘。	Figure 8: A relatively easily identifiable nerve sheath often encases the inferior portion of CN VIII.
面神经在神经切断术操作部位的前侧。	The facial nerve is exposed along the anterior aspect of the neurotomy.
笔者认为并不需要“水密”缝合硬脑膜，微血管减压术后发生脑脊液漏的概率仍非常低。	I do not perform a watertight dural closure and have experienced very low rates of cerebrospinal fluid leak through both the incision and the nose.
患者术后入住监护室观察一晚，重点关注血流动力学改变，神经查体及伤口护理，病情平稳后转入普通病房，数天后出院。	Patients are usually admitted to the Neuro ICU overnight for observation and then transferred to the regular ward for a couple of days before they are discharged home. Special attention should be paid to hemodynamic parameters, the neurologic examination, and wound care.
应用类固醇防止无菌性脑膜炎，减少术后恶心和头痛。	Steroids are administered to prevent aseptic meningitis and minimize postoperative nausea and headaches.
和其他乙状窦后开颅术一样，严密观察脑脊液漏相关体征。	As with any retrosigmoid craniotomy, the patient should be closely monitored for any sign of cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
听力损失确实是一项手术风险，因为操作涉及到了蜗神经。	Hearing loss is a real risk of this operation because the cochlear nerve is manipulated.
听力损失术后即刻就会出现。	A deficit will be immediately evident after the surgery.
任何主诉听力损失的病人都应该在术后进行纯音测听实验。	Any patient with subjective hearing loss should undergo pure tone audiometry postoperatively.
术中脑干听觉诱发反应监测可以帮助减少术后听力损失发生率。	Brainstem auditory evoked response monitoring during surgery can help reduce the incidence of postoperative hearing loss.
听力损失报道的发生率在5-10%。	Reported rates of hearing loss are in the 5-10% range.
特别的是，患者术后可能有眩晕感，严重恶心和（或）眼球震颤。	Particular to this operation, the patient may develop a sense of vertigo, severe nausea, and/or nystagmus.
这和前庭器官传入信号迅速缺失和迅速去神经传入有关。	This is related to the acute loss of input from one of the vestibular organs and its sudden deafferentation;
这些症状可以用止吐剂和前庭神经抑制剂控制。	these symptoms can be treated with antiemetics and vestibular suppressants.
这些症状是暂时的，1-2周内消失。	These symptoms are temporary and resolve within 1-2 weeks.
一些患者可以从前庭神经康复治疗中获益。	Some patients may benefit from vestibular rehabilitation therapy.
前庭神经康复治疗通过训练提高平衡能力，促进中枢神经系统对失衡的代偿。	Vestibular rehabilitation uses exercise activities to maximize balance and central nervous system compensation for disequilibrium.
大多数患者（~90%）的术前眩晕症状在术后显著改善，一些患者不再眩晕发作。	The preoperative vertiginous symptoms of most patients (~90%) improve significantly after surgery, and many are free of attacks.
可惜目前没有大型试验确定这一手术的效能，目前的文章仅仅涉及小样本试验。	Unfortunately, no large trials have been conducted to establish the efficacy of this surgery, and current literature consists of small case series.
然而，经历这一手术的几乎所有患者生活质量都得到改善，一些患者可以重新开始工作。	However, almost all patients who undergo the surgery report improved quality of life and many are able to return to work.
因此，这一手术确实有益于有手术指征的患者。	Therefore, the procedure is indeed beneficial when performed on a properly selected patient.
· 梅尼埃病是膜迷路积水的疾病，特点是眩晕发作，低频感音神经性听力下降，耳鸣和耳闷胀感。	Meniere’s disease is a disorder of the endolymphatic hydrops characterized by vertiginous attacks, low frequency sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus, and aural fullness.
· 正确诊断困难但对手术结果非常重要。	Correct diagnosis can be difficult but is paramount for satisfactory operative results.
正确诊断需要全面的病史、体格检查和特定的耳鼻喉科测试。	Accurate diagnosis requires a thorough history and physical examination along with dedicated otolaryngological tests.
· 生活和饮食调整、利尿剂和前庭神经抑制剂是一线治疗。	Lifestyle and dietary modifications, diuretics, and vestibular sedatives are the first line treatments.
难治性患者考虑侵入性治疗方法。	Patients with refractory symptoms can be considered for more invasive procedures.
· 前庭神经切断术经迷路后入路，听力损失和面瘫的风险低。	Vestibular neurotomy is performed through a retromastoid approach and carries a low risk of hearing loss and facial palsy.
· 切除前庭神经时，切线应与CN VII横断面平行，尽量避免损伤面神经。	During sectioning of the vestibular nerve, the cutting direction should be as parallel to the width of CN VII as possible to avoid facial nerve injury.
不能碰到迷路动脉，避免血管痉挛及其导致的听力损失。	The labyrinthine artery should not be manipulated to avoid its vasospasm and subsequent hearing loss.
· 由于术侧前庭器官迅速去神经传入，患者术后可能有眩晕感、恶心和（或）眼震。	Due to sudden deafferentation of the vestibular organs on the operated side, patients may develop a sense of vertigo, nausea, and/or nystagmus postoperatively.
这些症状常常自愈，1-2周后消失。	These symptoms are usually self-limiting and resolve over 1-2 weeks.
硬脑膜静脉窦损伤	Dural Venous Sinus Injury
现代外科医生尽管运用精细的显微外科操作技术，但几乎每个神经外科医生都会遇到术中发生硬脑膜静脉窦损伤和出血。	Despite the use of meticulous microsurgical techniques, dural venous sinus injury and bleeding is encountered by virtually all neurosurgeons.
如果处理不当，静脉窦损伤和闭塞可能导致致命的静脉性脑梗死和不可逆性的神经功能障碍。	Dural sinus injury and occlusion can lead to devastating venous infarction and irreversible neurologic deficits, if not handled judiciously.
因此，有必要进行术前预测、提前准备并保持冷静，以便妥善处理静脉窦出血。	Therefore, it is imperative to anticipate, be prepared, remain calm, and be determined to manage dural sinus bleeding wisely.
特别强调一些有价值的处理措施。	Some measures are worth special emphasis.
作为预防性措施，术中应该避免不必要的静脉窦暴露，开颅时距中线应不小于1.5cm。	As a preventive measure, unnecessary exposure of the venous sinuses should be avoided and craniotomies should be no closer than 1.5 cm to midline.
当开颅手术位置靠近这些静脉窦时，使用带护板的铣刀前应该将窦壁与颅骨完全分离。	When the craniotomy is in close proximity to these sinuses, the wall of the sinus should be generously separated from the inner skull bone before the footplate of the drill is used.
在老年患者、重复手术和厚颅骨患者中很难预测是否完全分离。	The difficulty of this dissection is anticipated in elderly patients, repeat operations, and patients with thick skull.
邻近硬脑膜静脉窦的硬脑膜很快回缩可导致静脉窦堵塞和血栓形成。	Aggressive retraction along the dura near the dural venous sinuses may lead to sinus occlusion and thrombosis.
静脉窦堵塞可引起术中脑膨出和自发性脑出血。	Venous sinus compromise can cause intraoperative brain swelling and spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.
因此，如果遇到术中脑张力高，首先应排除邻近静脉窦堵塞。	Therefore, if intraoperative cerebral tension is encountered, one should rule out inadvertent occlusion of the neighboring venous sinuses.
静脉窦暂时性回缩过程中，可以采用微多普勒超声检查确认静脉窦通畅和血流情况。	Microdoppler ultrasonography can confirm the patency of and flow within of the sinuses during temporary retraction.
当术中遇到非重要静脉窦出血时，如枕窦，需要进行丝线结扎或使用Weck结扎夹夹闭。	When bleeding from a nonvital venous sinus, such as the occipital sinus, is encountered, the sinus may be ligated using silk sutures or Weck clips.
这种情况也会发生于后颅窝手术硬膜Y形剪开时。	This can occur during Y-shape dural opening during posterior fossa operations.
图1. 开颅术中，最后一次切除的骨瓣必须靠近或超过静脉窦位置，确保术中无意损伤静脉窦时可以及时评估骨瓣去除范围来控制出血。	Figure 1: During the craniotomy, the last bony cut must be made near and over the sinus to ensure timely elevation of the bone flap to control bleeding in case an inadvertent injury to the sinus occurs.
如果窦壁与骨板粘连，使用无护板的B1型铣刀铣去静脉窦外的骨质：用铣刀头在外层骨皮质和骨松质开一骨槽，内层皮质骨层打开后在直视下取出骨瓣。	If the sinus wall is adherent to the inner skull, a B1 bit without a footplate may be used to perform the bony cut over the sinus: The outer cortical and cancellous bone is drilled to create a trough. The inner cortical bone layer is then gently fractured under direct vision to elevate the bone flap.
如果遇到静脉窦明显出血，骨瓣取出后对出血位点进行精确止血，而不是盲目的通过窦腔填塞止血。	If significant sinus bleeding is encountered, the sinus should be unroofed so that the site of bleeding can be adequately addressed, rather than by means of blind packing of the sinus lumen via hemostatic agents.
为了保护静脉窦，笔者在打开硬膜时会超过静脉窦位置。	To protect the sinus during dural opening, I incise the dura based over the sinus.
延伸的静脉窦和静脉湖常超过静脉窦缘，因此，打开硬膜时必须沿硬膜的正中区域。	The extensions of the venous sinuses and venous lakes often reach beyond the margins of the sinuses; therefore, the dural opening must be conducted judiciously along the paramedian regions.
止血	Hemostasis
暴露损伤位置后，接下来是达到出血部或清除术野，选择必要的措施进行窦的修复。	After exposing the area of the injury, the next step involves reaching hemostasis and/or clearing the operative field to select the maneuvers necessary to repair the sinus.
面对大出血，术者应该保持镇静，同时告诉麻醉师即将发生大出血，迅速做好容量置换准备。	The operator should remain composed in the face of torrential bleeding and warn the anesthesiologist about imminent massive blood loss and the need for immediate volume replacement.
棉片填塞时需注意动作要轻柔，很容易控制低压力性的静脉出血，术者不应该盲目的通过窦腔填塞止血材料（如明胶海绵或止血纱），因为该措施可能导致静脉窦闭塞和潜在的脑肿胀。	Gentle tamponade using cotton patties readily controls the low-pressurized venous bleeding. The operator should not indiscriminately pack hemostatic agents (such as Gelfoam, or Surgicel) into the lumen of the sinus because this maneuver would lead to sinus occlusion and potentially cerebral swelling.
术前恰当的血管重建对评估侧支静脉引流很重要。	Assessment of collateral venous drainage is important before determining the appropriate reconstruction techniques.
静脉窦出血首选是控制窦近心端和远心端血管，该措施可以缓解窦的撕裂程度，长动脉瘤夹或血管斗牛犬夹可用于临时阻断止血。	Proximal and distal vascular control over the sinus is preferred. Subject to the extent of the tear and ease of this maneuver, long aneurysm clips or vascular bulldogs may be used to temporarily halt bleeding.
横断静脉窦过程中，如果窦被开颅边缘的骨质覆盖而不能控制静脉窦近端和远端血管时，可用棉球临时密封窦腔。	In the event of venous sinus transection, if the proximal and distal control is not feasible because the sinus is covered by bone along the craniotomy edges, cotton balls may be used to seal the sinus lumen temporarily.
部分静脉窦撕裂时禁用双极电凝处理，这会使硬脑膜边缘收缩扩大撕裂程度，甚至开放静脉窦，从而使问题变的更复杂。	Bipolar coagulation is contraindicated in partial sinus tears as this maneuver will enlarge the tear/opening by shrinking the dural edges and compounding the problem.
患者头部轻度上仰15度可以降低窦内压力，但是这会显著增加空气栓塞风险，对高度怀疑空气栓塞者必须采取措施。	Gentle elevation of the patient’s head (15 degrees) will reduce venous pressure within the sinus. However, this tactic dramatically increases the risk of air embolism and a high index of suspicion for air emboli must be pursued.
患者头部升高可以减少出血，但不应该升高至出现顺行静脉出血，这会导致逆行性空气虹吸。	The patient’s head may be elevated to reduce bleeding, but should not be raised to stop an anterograde venous hemorrhage because this leads to retrograde air siphoning.
图2. 硬脑膜正中切开过程中最常见的静脉窦损伤是沿窦外侧缘出现的小型撕裂。	Figure 2: The most common form of injury to the sinus is a small tear along the lateral edge of the sinus during paramedian dural opening.
当术者完成最内侧硬膜切开暴露纵裂时，可能会误判变化的静脉窦（静脉湖）外侧延伸部分。	The operator may misjudge the lateral extension of the variable venous sinus (venous lake) and as he or she attempts to complete the most medial dural incision to expose the interhemispheric space.
图3. 如果窦缘或静脉湖撕裂出血，电凝出血点会加大撕裂口。	Figure 3: If the sinus edge or lake is torn, coagulation of the bleeding point leads to a larger tear.
可使用单针丝线缝合撕裂口达到原发性闭合，此外也可用肌瓣缝合开口，余下硬膜按计划缝合。	The small opening may be closed via primary closure using a single stitch. Alternatively, a piece of muscle can be used to plug the opening along with the suture as demonstrated in the above illustration. The rest of the dural opening may proceed as planned.
硬脑膜静脉窦损伤修补	Repair of the Dural Venous Sinus Injury
多种技术手段可用于硬膜静脉窦损伤的修补，其基本原则是保护静脉窦同时减少失血。	A variety of techniques may be employed to repair large lacerations within the dural sinuses. The fundamental principle is preservation of the sinus while controlling blood loss.
为了避免血流动力学的不稳定因素，术者可能会暂停手术进行彻底止血，从患者面部血流量监测确保麻醉师有机会进行容量置换。	To avoid hemodynamic instability, the operator may pause to obtain complete hemostasis and work intermittently in face of some bleeding from the lumen to make sure the anesthesiologist has a chance to replace the blood volume.
图4. 依据上矢状窦损伤位置及长度、窦破裂程度和损伤类型，确定上矢状窦损伤修补方式。	Figure 4: The recommended algorithm for repairing an injury to the superior sagittal sinus is determined based on the location of the injury along the length of the sinus, the degree of sinus disruption, and the mode of injury.
上矢状窦前1/3损伤	Injury to the Anterior One-Third of the Superior Sagittal Sinus
只要患者存在矢状窦静脉缺乏，上矢状窦前1/3（冠状缝前）这段血管可能会有少量闭塞或无闭塞风险。	The anterior one-third segment of the superior sagittal sinus (anterior to the coronal suture) may be occluded with little or no risk to the patient as long as there is paucity of parasagittal veins around this segment.
但这也有例外，因此在保留静脉窦时尽可能的延长其整个长度。	There are exceptions to this rule, and I have therefore attempted to save the venous sinus along its entire length when possible.
图5. 窦的前段，去除额外骨瓣相对应长度的静脉窦损伤部位可用2-0丝线结扎（右下图）。	Figure 5: At the anterior segment of the sinus, the injured section of the sinus can be tied off using 2-0 silk sutures after the corresponding length of the sinus is exposed through removal of additional bone (right lower image).
上矢状窦后2/3损伤	Injury to the Posterior Two-Thirds of the Superior Sagittal Sinus
该部分静脉窦对大脑半球引流至关重要，术中必须保护避免致命性的静脉梗死。	This segment of the sinus is vital for drainage of the hemispheres, and its patent lumen must be preserved to avoid devastating venous infarction.
损伤类型对制定窦壁缺损修补方式也起重要作用。	The mode of injury plays an important role regarding the recommended methods to repair the defects in the wall.
图6. 外伤凹陷性颅骨骨折或铣刀护板可引起静脉窦壁上方意外断裂或出现相当大的撕裂，这都不利于静脉窦的原发性闭合。	Figure 6: Traumatic depressed skull fractures or the footplate of the drill can cause inadvertent interruptions or sizable tears along the superior wall of the sinus that are not amenable to primary closure.
这种情况下，笔者选择去除超过窦的额外骨质，迅速检查窦损伤的形态和撕裂程度，使用长棉片或棉条置于撕裂处止血。	In these situations, I remove additional bone over the sinus expeditiously and investigate the morphology and extent of the tear. A piece of Surgical fibrillar, a long cotton patty, or strip of cotton is placed over the tear and hemostasis is secured through gentle pressure.
使用止血材料填塞窦壁或窦腔过程中，重要的是避免诱发出血和封堵缺陷。	Again, it is important to avoid the temptation to stop the bleeding and occlude the defect in the sinus wall/lumen with packing hemostatic materials.
矢状窦旁硬脑膜的长度要长于撕裂处切开的硬膜（摇摆硬膜瓣）长度，翻折后覆盖于缺损的窦壁。	A piece of the parasagittal dura that is longer than the laceration is incised (“swing flap”) and reflected over to cover the defect in the wall of the sinus.
硬膜切开过程中需小心保护矢状窦的桥静脉。	Parasagittal bridging veins should be carefully protected during these dural incisions.
图7. 摆动的硬脑膜缝合于镰旁硬脑膜上，最终实现静脉窦顶的重建。	Figure 7: The swing dural flap is sutured to the contralateral paramedian dura.
摆动的硬脑膜完全缝合前移除棉片。	The final result allows reconstruction of the roof of the sinus.
如果撕裂部位于脑深部，可将摆动的硬脑膜缝合于大脑镰或小脑幕上。	The sheet of cotton may be removed before the swing flap is completely sewn in. The swing flap may be sutured to the falx or tentorium if the laceration is more internal.
如果术中出现脑肿胀，可将血管分流管置于窦腔，迅速恢复血液流动。	If cerebral swelling is encountered during this procedure, a vascular shunt tubing may be placed inside the sinus lumen to restore blood flow immediately.
术中血管荧光造影可以确定完全重建后窦内血流情况。	Intraoperative fluorescent angiography can confirm flow within the sinus after reconstruction is complete.
如果初期尝试窦壁重建和血流恢复失败，窦腔内会出现血栓。	If the initial attempt to reconstruct the wall and restore flow is not successful, a thrombus within the lumen is expected.
这时将吸引器头插入摆动的硬膜下清除窦腔内血栓，恢复血流，也可以使用肝素进行灌洗。	The suction tip is inserted underneath the swing dural flap and into the lumen to remove the clot and restore flow. The lumen is also irrigated with Heparin solution.
窦汇损伤	Injury to the Torcula
窦汇处的任何损伤都可能是致命性的，一旦出血必须控制出血并进行窦汇重建。	Any injury to the torcula can be life threatening and swift control of the bleeding and reconstruction of the torcula are mandatory.
图8. 窦汇撕裂修补步骤示意图。	Figure 8: The steps involved in repair of a torcular tear are illustrated.
对于小型撕裂，取一块明胶海绵覆盖于撕裂口上方以控制出血（图A，左上）。	For small lacerations, a piece of Gelfoam sponge is temporarily placed over the laceration covered with a cottonoid patty to control the bleeding (A, left upper).
填塞物不能堵塞窦汇并能使其保持相对畅通。	The tamponade should not occlude the dural sinuses and keep the flow in the torcula relatively preserved.
窦汇明显堵塞可造成突发脑肿胀，从而使治疗变得棘手复杂。	A significant occlusion of the trocula can lead to sudden brain swelling, complicating any management scheme.
对于大型撕裂口，可取一块自体筋膜或同种异体脑膜进行缝合固定（图B，右上）。	For larger lacerations, a piece of fascia or allograft dura may be sutured in place (B, right upper corner).
对于广泛撕裂口，可选用一块自体带筋膜的肌肉瓣进行窦顶重建。	For extensive lacerations of the torcula, a large piece of muscle and its attached fascia are used to construct the roof of the sinus.
最后一针缝合前要注意清除窦内的血栓凝块。	Note that some of the clot within the sinsues should be removed before the last stitches are placed.
同时，在窦汇重建过程中，对横窦的影响是无法挽回的，可能要因此而牺牲横窦（图C和图D，底部）。	Also, one of the more affected transverse sinuses may be unsalvageable and has to be sacrificed during the process of reconstruction (C and D, bottom panel).
由于不可控性出血的高风险，在大脑相对松弛的情况下积极的清除管腔内血栓凝块。	Aggressive removal of the intraluminal clot in a relatively relaxed brain is not advised due to the high risk of uncontrollable bleeding.
横窦损伤修补	Repair of the Repair of the Transverse Sinus Injury
横窦损伤的处理具有挑战性，原因是这些窦对幕上和幕下静脉引流非常关键。	Dealing with injury of the transverse sinuses can be challenging because these sinuses are critical for drainage of supratentorial and infratentorial contents.
最重要的是术前需要确定横窦的优势型，常见的是右侧横窦优势型。	It is critically important to determine the dominance of the transverse sinuses preoperatively; the right transverse sinus is most often dominant.
当右侧横窦为上矢状窦主要引流出口时，其出血可能是灾难性的，需不惜一切代价保留窦汇。	Right-sided transverse sinus bleeding can be catastrophic when it is the predominant drainage outlet for the superior sagittal sinus. The torcula must be preserved at all cost.
横窦重建原则与以上讨论前后矢状窦重建原则一样。	The principles of transverse sinus reconstruction are the same as those discussed above in the case of the posterior superior sagittal sinus.
图9. 右侧枕叶胶质瘤开颅切除术中右侧横窦顶严重损伤，这种损伤不宜作一期修补。	Figure 9:  Significant injury to the roof of the right transverse sinus occurred during craniotomy for resection of a right occipital glioma. This injury was not amenable to primary repair.
首先，位于横窦和乙状窦上的额外骨质需去除，利用血管控制出血。	First, additional bone over the transverse and sigmoid sinuses was removed to obtain vascular control.
其次，使用棉片覆盖于损伤窦壁（左上图），进行窦的重建。	Next, a cotton patty was used to cover the wall defect (left upper image) while the sinus reconstruction is performed.
制备右枕硬脑膜摆动的硬膜瓣（右上图），注意保护Labbe静脉（吸引器头端处）。	A swing dural flap from the occipital dura is prepared (right upper image) while the vein of Labbe (at the tip of the suction) is protected.
硬膜瓣翻折用于重建窦顶（右下图）。	This dural flap is reflected and used to reconstruct the roof (right lower image).
术中吲哚青绿血管造影显示窦腔通畅。	Intraoperative indocyannine green angiography reveals the patency of the sinus lumen.
· 对术前影像学资料进行细致研究，可为了解静脉解剖变化和术中避免静脉窦损伤采取必要措施至关重要。	A meticulous study of the preoperative images is crucial for understanding variations in venous anatomy and the precautions that are necessary during surgery to avoid venous injuries.
· 窦腔填塞时动作轻柔可以很容易控制静脉出血，静脉窦腔不应使用止血材料进行填塞。	Venous bleeding may be easily controlled using gentle tamponade. The lumen of the sinus should not be occluded with hemostatic packing materials.
· 大多数静脉窦损伤可在控制窦近心端和远心端后进行修补。	Most dural sinus injuries can be repaired after proximal and distal control are secured.
硬膜外前床突切除术	Extradural Clinoidectomy
前床突切除术是脑血管及颅底外科中的重要技术之一，其最根本的意义在于充分显露近端颈内动脉、视神经、蝶鞍和中央颅底。	Anterior clinoidectomy is an important tool for neurovascular and skull base surgery. This technique is cardinal for expanding access to the proximal carotid artery, optic nerve, sella and the central skull base.
切除前床突可显露颈内动脉眼动脉段的近端和床突段，并同时轮廓化视神经近端；并可通过安全地部分游离、松解和移位颈内动脉和视神经，扩大视神经-颈内动脉间隙和颈内动脉-动眼神经间隙，进而更好地显露脚间池。	The goal of anterior clinoidectomy is to reveal the more proximal ophthalmic and clinoidal segments of the internal carotid artery (ICA) while skeletonizing the proximal optic nerve. This maneuver expands the optico-carotid and carotid-oculomotor windows and therefore the operative corridor to the interpeduncular cisterns—both the carotid artery and optic nerve are partially untethered or liberated and can be more safely mobilized.
目前的争议主要在于运用该项技术的适应症，以及关于硬膜外或者硬膜内进行操作的利弊。	Controversy surrounds the value of clinoidectomy for “appropriately selected” cases. Moreover, there is no consensus on the indications and benefits of an extradural versus intradural clinoidectomy.
各种改良术式的报道也使得该技术变得“复杂化”，从而消磨了部分神经外科医师对于掌握该技术的热情。	Many modified variations of this osteotomy have complicated its technical complexity and further dampened some surgeons’ enthusiasm for adopting this technique.
本章节的目的就在于阐明上述问题。	This chapter aims to clarify and simplify the appropriate indications for clinoidectomy.
硬膜外前床突切除术的适应症和优势有：	The indications and advantages of an extradural clinoidectomy are:
在硬膜外间隙对蝶骨嵴内侧部和前床突进行充分骨质磨除，硬脑膜起到了保护硬膜内神经血管结果的作用。	The extradural space allows a more “aggressive” osteotomy of the medial sphenoid wing and clinoid while protecting the intradural neurovascular structures during drilling.
对于有适应症的病变，磨除的技术和范围很少有变异。	This maneuver is less selective and more inclusive for some pathologies.
该技术尤其适用于蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤，术中早期即可实现控制肿瘤基底和视神经减压的目的，可切除肿瘤浸润化的前床突，而对视神经的早期减压也可减少在处理肿瘤主体过程中对神经的牵拉损伤。	It is more beneficial for resection of medial sphenoid wing meningiomas as it allows devascularization of the tumor and decompression of the optic nerve early in the surgery. The tumor-infiltrated clinoid can be removed. With early decompression of the nerve, further tumor manipulation may not place the nerve at risk of traction injury.
该技术也是经硬膜外中颅底入路处理海绵窦病变的步骤之一。	This maneuver is also used as part of the extradural middle fossa approach to the lesions of the cavernous sinus.
硬膜内前床突切除术的适应症和优势有：	The indications and advantages of the intradural clinoidectomy are:
该技术需要切除的前床突骨质较少，但磨除骨质时，有损伤周边硬膜内结构的风险。	The intradural clinoidectomy allows a relatively limited osteotomy of the clinoid process while the intradural structures are at risk during drilling and exposed to bone dust.
对于有适应症的病变，磨除的技术和范围有很大的选择性。	This maneuver is more selective and the osteotomy can be tailored to the underlying pathology.
该技术适用于眼动脉和床突旁动脉瘤的夹闭，磨除范围可根据实际需要而定。由于直视硬膜内结构，故可避免导致动脉瘤术中破裂的操作。	This procedure is desirable for clip ligation of ophthalmic and paraclinoid artery aneurysms because bone removal can be tailored while carefully monitoring the aneurysm to prevent manipulations that could potentially place the aneurysm at risk of intraoperative rupture.
前床突部分切除术在处理近端后交通动脉瘤时也是必须的。	A partial clinoidectomy may also be necessary for proximal posterior communicating artery aneurysms.
硬膜内前床突切除术引起脑脊液鼻漏的概率较硬膜外操作小，	An intradural clinoidectomy may be associated with a smaller risk of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea for two reasons.
原因一在于，早期即进入硬膜内探明病变解剖，可避免一部分不必要的前床突切除术；	First, by performing an early intradural inspection of the pathoanatomy, a clinoidectomy may be deemed unnecessary.
原因二在于，根据具体需要来磨除部分前床突，避免了整个前床突的切除。	Second, a partial clinoidectomy tailored to the pathology at hand may obviate the need for a complete clinoidectomy.
最终，术者的偏好和熟悉度也是决定硬膜外还是硬膜内进行操作的重要因素。	Ultimately, the surgeon’s preference and comfort level dictate which side of the dura is entered to execute an anterior clinoidectomy.
笔者偏向于硬膜外，原因就在于我对这一入路更为熟悉。	I prefer the extradural approach because of my experience level with this procedure.
我也偏向于尽量避免在硬膜内进行磨钻的操作，以减少损伤周围结构的风险。	I also prefer to avoid drilling within the intradural space if possible to minimize the risk of injury to neighboring structures.
建议在硬膜外前床突切除术前行腰椎引流，因为在术中早期，无法通过打开硬脑膜释放脑脊液来降低颅压，而这将妨碍硬脑膜的剥离。	A lumbar drain is recommended for an extradural clinoidectomy since early intradural CSF decompression for mobilization of the dura is impossible during this procedure.
术前CT需评估前床突气化程度，这将为术中填塞骨质缺损提供依据，以避免脑脊液漏。	The extent of aeration of the clinoid (pneumatized clinoid) may be evaluated on a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan and predicts the need for more robust plugging of the bony defect after the clinoidectomy to avoid a CSF fistula.
气化是前床突最常见的解剖变异，在拟行床突旁动脉瘤手术夹闭的患者中，气化者可多达28%。	Clinoid pneumatization is the most frequently encountered anatomical variation of the anterior clinoid process in up to 28% of the patients scheduled for paraclinoid aneurysm surgery.
气化腔可由鼻旁窦扩展而来，筛窦气房可延续入前床突前根，蝶窦气房可进入视柱，或两种情况同时存在。	Pneumatization occurs through paranasal sinus extensions into the anterior clinoid process, such as the ethmoid sinus over the anterior root, the sphenoid sinus over the optic strut or both.
目前最多见的气化部位是前根。	By far, pneumatization over the anterior root is the most frequently encountered.
另外，此种变异可见于单侧或双侧。	Furthermore, it can be observed uni- or bilaterally.
除了评估前床突气化程度，薄层CT的另一目的是明确有无床突韧带的骨化，尤其是颈内动脉床突韧带和床突间韧带。	Besides investigating clinoid pneumatization, thin-slice bone window CT scan is useful to identify ossification of the clinoidal ligaments, specially the carticoclinoid and the interclinoid ligaments.
前者骨化后形成一连于前床突尖端至中床突的骨桥，与前、中床突构成一封闭或不封闭的骨环，即所谓的颈内动脉床突孔（caroticoclinoidal foramen ，CCF）。	In the first case, a complete or incomplete bony ring is formed with an osseus bridge from the tip of the anterior to the middle clinoid process, which is referred to as caroticoclinoidal foramen (CCF).
该结构可见于17%的病例，可以单侧或双侧。	CCFs occur in up to 17% of the patients, either uni- or bilaterally.
床突间韧带骨化后即形成床突间骨桥（interclinoidosseus bridge，IOB）。	On the other hand, the ossification of the interclinoid ligament generates the interclinoid osseus bridge (IOB).
该结构是前床突解剖变异中最少见的情况，发生率约为2.8%。	IOB is the least frequent anatomical variation of the anterior clinoid process with an estimated occurrence of 2.8%.
这些变异是前床突切除术的绝对指征，而且也需要同时联合硬膜外和硬膜内入路进行操作，以避免颈内动脉或视神经、动眼神经的严重损伤。	Removal of the anterior clinoid process in such situations is extremely demanding and a combined extradural and intradural clinoidectomy is advised in order not to severe the internal carotid artery or even the optic or oculomotor nerves.
动脉瘤顶与前床突硬脑膜相粘连是硬膜外前床突切除术的禁忌症。	Adherence of the aneurysm dome to the dura overlying the clinoid is a contraindication for an extradural clinoidectomy.
此外，动脉瘤顶侵蚀床突骨质，以及存在颈内动脉床突孔，均需要使用硬膜内技术。	In addition, both erosion of the clinoid by the aneurysm dome and the presence of the carotidoclinoid foramen demand an intradural technique.
术前CT血管成像需明确动脉瘤颈是否累及颈内动脉远环的近端侧。	Extension of the aneurysm neck proximal to the outer dural ring should be assessed on a preoperative CT angiogram.
尽管通过切除前床突、打开远环，可获得几毫米的额外空间来暴露瘤颈，但对于一些瘤颈显著扩张而深入海绵窦内的情况，开颅显微夹闭还是很难实施的。	Although following clinoidectomy, opening of the outer dural ring provides access to an additional few millimeters of the aneurysm neck, significant extension of certain types of paraclinoid aneurysm necks into the cavernous sinus preclude the use of an open microsurgical route for clip ligation.
图1：冠状位CT血管成像，可见左侧眼动脉瘤瘤颈而非瘤顶已侵蚀部分前床突，须行前床突切除术来暴露瘤颈。	Figure 1: A coronal CT angiogram demonstrates the need for a clinoidectomy to expose the neck of this ophthalmic artery aneurysm. The neck may be partially eroding through the clinoid but the dome is not involved.
图2：蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤，肿瘤浸润引起前床突骨质增生的MR影像（黑色箭头）和CT影像（白色箭头）。	Figure 2: Medial sphenoid wing meningioma and associated hyperostosis (tumor-infiltrated) clinoid on MR (black arrow) and CT (white arrow) imaging.
这一区域的界限如下：上界和外侧界为额颞部硬脑膜，前界和下界为眶筋膜和视柱。	The frontotemporal dura defines the superior and lateral borders to the clinoid, whereas the periorbita and optic strut limit the anterior and inferior borders.
后界的内下部为颈内动脉床突段。	The clinoid segment of the internal carotid artery (ICA) provides the posterior limit inferomedially.
后界的外下部，向前穿行入眶上裂的神经血管结构覆盖于一层膜性结构的深面。	Inferolaterally, the neurovascular structures of the cavernous sinus lie under a layer of periosteal dura that emerges anteriorly into the superior orbital fissure.
与前床突区域相关的硬脑膜结构包括镰状韧带、远环、颈内动脉动眼神经膜。	The corresponding dural elements in the region related to the anterior clinoid include the falciform ligament, the distal dural ring, and the carotid-oculomotor membrane.
远环界定了颈内动脉进入硬膜内腔的分界。	The distal ring defines the border at which the ICA enters the intradural compartment.
远环所在平面，从前向后、从外向内，呈现向下倾斜的角度。	The plane of this ring slants downward from anterior to posterior and in a lateral to medial directions.
这一倾斜角度在颈内动脉内侧产生一憩室，即为颈动脉窝。	The diverticulum medial to the ICA created by this slant is called the carotid cave.
游离视神经和颈内动脉，需分别切开镰状韧带和远环。	The falciform ligament and distal dural ring may be incised to liberate the optic nerve and the ICA, respectively.
动眼神经穿行于海绵窦上外侧壁内，在前床突下方向前进入眶上裂。	The oculomotor nerve travels within the superalateral wall of the cavernous sinus and courses anteriorly just below the anterior clinoid process to enter the superior orbital fissure.
因此，在切除前床突时，须避免向下方的剧烈操作。	Therefore, significant manipulation of the anterior clinoid process during its removal in this inferior direction should be avoided.
图3：前床突和鞍区的骨性解剖系列图，可见周边结构与前床突的骨性关系。在D中，上面观显示了左侧的完全性床突间骨桥（Intercl. Bridge），同时合并右侧的完全性颈内动脉床突孔（Caroticoclin. For.）（红色箭头）。Ant.: 前; Car颈内动脉; Clin.:床突; Em. V.: 导静脉; Fiss.: 裂; For孔; Gr.:大; Lac.: 泪腺; Less.: 小; Mid.: 中; Orb.: 眶; Pit.: 垂体; Post.: 后; Sphen.: 蝶; Sulc.: 沟; Sup.: 上; Tuberc.: 鞍结节。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	Figure 3: Sequential photographs of the clinoid and sellar region demonstrating the osseus relationships of the anterior clinoid process. In D, a superior view shows a complete interclinoid bridge on the left side (Intercl. Bridge) and a complete caroticoclinoidal foramen (Caroticoclin. For.) on the right side of the specimen (red arrow). Ant.: anterior; Car.: carotid; Clin.: clinoid; Em. V.: emissary vein; Fiss.: fissure; For.: foramen; Gr.: greater; Lac.: lacrimal; Less.: lesser; Mid.: middle; Orb.: orbital; Pit.: pituitary; Post.: posterior; Sphen.: sphenoid; Sulc.: sulcus; Sup.: superior; Tuberc.: tuberculum sellae (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton Jr).​
图4：前床突与床突韧带的详细解剖图。	Figure 4: A detailed view demonstrates the relationships of the anterior clinoid to the clinoidal ligaments.
左侧可见一完全性颈内动脉床突孔，同时合并同侧的不完全性床突间骨桥。	A complete caroticoclinoidal foramen is identified on the left side, together with an ipsilateral incomplete interclinoid bridge.
前床突尖端（红色）有一骨桥（绿色）与中床突（黄色）相连。	The tip of the anterior clinoid process (red) has a bridge (green) that connects it to the middle clinoid process (yellow).
蓝色标记的骨棘即为指向后床突的不完全性床突间骨桥。	The osseous spike displayed in blue represents the incomplete interclinoid bridge connected to the posterior clinoid process.
Ant.: 前; CCF: 颈内动脉床突孔; Interclin.: 床突间。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	Ant. : anterior; CCF: caroticoclinoidal foramen; Interclin. : interclinoidal. (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton Jr.)
图5：薄层CT（骨窗）显示一不完全性颈内动脉床突孔（白色箭头）和一完全性床突间骨桥（黄色箭头），该例患者为蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤。	Figure 5: Thin-slice CT (bone window) of an incomplete caroticoclinoidal foramen (white arrow) and also an incomplete interclinoidal bridge (yellow arrow) in a patient affected by a medial sphenoid wing meningioma is demonstrated.
图6：前床突切除术后获得的暴露。	Figure 6: The view gained by a clinoidectomy.
注意颈内动脉床突段的广泛暴露（左图）。	Note the extended view of the clinoidal segment of the ICA (left image).
视神经与前床突紧紧相邻，这使得术中磨除前床突时易损伤视神经。	The proximity of the optic nerve to the clinoid places it at risk during drilling.
床突间隙的上界和外侧界为额颞部硬脑膜。	The superior and lateral borders of the clinoid space are provided by the frontotemporal dura.
眶筋膜、视柱和蝶骨构成前界和下界。	The periorbita, optic strut, and sphenoid bone are the anterior and inferior limits.
去除其他骨性及膜性结构后可显露其他相关的重要结构（注意走行于海绵窦外侧壁内的颅神经）（右图）。	The relationships of other relevant vital structures (note the cranial nerves within the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus) are presented after other overlying dura and bone are removed (right image).
去除前床突时有损伤这些结构的风险。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	These vital structures are at risk during mobilization of the process (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
由于该区域神经血管结构非常密集，因此通过移位某些神经和关键血管来扩大手术间隙显得尤其重要。	Given the large number of neurovascular structures in this region, the importance of any additional space through mobility of any nerves or key vessels is immediately apparent for operative access.
对于这些技术的学习，主要的难点在于理解前床突和周围重要结构的三维立体结构。	A major impediment to learning this technique is a lack of three-dimensional understanding of the clinoid and the surrounding vital structures.
本文将尽力理清这些复杂的解剖关系。	I will attempt to simplify the germane operative anatomy.
接下来的图片将重点展示离断前床突所必须的三个步骤：	The following images emphasize three osteotomies required for disconnection of the clinoid:
1.沿蝶骨嵴内侧部磨除，以离断前床突外侧部；	Osteotomy along the medial sphenoid wing to disconnect the lateral connection
2.沿眶顶壁磨除，以离断前床突前部和内侧部；	Osteotomy along the orbital roof to disconnect the anterior and medial connections
3.在前床突内部行“蛋壳化”磨除，使其与前下方的视柱相离断。	Drilling within the clinoid to create an “egg shell” and disconnect the anteroinferior connection to the optic strut
完成上述三个步骤后，蛋壳化的前床突可移位并从各床突韧带上游离下来。	After the completion of the above three steps, the shell of the clinoid can be mobilized and dissected away from the clinoidal ligaments.
在眶上裂层面，海绵窦外侧壁的外层和内层可被区分，并可小心地将两者钝性分离。	At the level of the superior orbital fissure, the outer and inner layers of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus are distinguishable and can be bluntly and gently dissected from each other.
内层包含有颅神经，外层即为颞窝硬脑膜的脑膜层。	The inner layer contains the cranial nerves, and the outer layer is formed by the temporal fossa dura.
在眶上裂附近，硬脑膜的骨膜层与眶筋膜的骨膜层相延续。	Near the superior orbital fissure, the periosteal layer of the dura is in continuity with the periosteal layer of the periorbita.
因此，眶上裂外侧界的硬脑膜返折实质上由眶筋膜和颞窝硬脑膜融合而成。	Therefore, the dural fold along the lateral edge of the superior orbital fissure appears as a periosteal layer formed by the fusion of the periorbital and temporal dura.
图7：步骤一，沿蝶骨嵴内侧部磨除，以离断前床突外侧部，并轮廓化眶上裂（绿色）。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	Figure 7: The first step involves an osteotomy along the medial sphenoid wing to disconnect the lateral connection of the clinoid and skeletonize the superior orbital fissure (shown in green)(Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图8：步骤二，沿视神经管顶壁及额骨内侧（粉色）磨除，以离断前床突前部和内侧部；视神经减压也可在移位前床突而牵拉神经的过程中起到保护神经的作用。	Figure 8: The second step involves an osteotomy along the roof of the optic nerve and frontal bone medially (shown in pink) to disconnect the anterior and medial connections of the clinoid.
步骤三，在前床突内部行“蛋壳化”磨除，使其与前下方的视柱（绿色）相离断。	This decompression of the nerve protects the nerve from any traction injury during mobilization of the clinoid.
（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	The last osteotomy involves drilling within the clinoid to create an “egg shell” and disconnect the anteroinferior connection to the optic strut (shown in green)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
硬膜外前床突切除术	EXTRADURAL ANTERIOR CLINOIDECTOMY
硬膜外前床突切除术需行翼点或眶颧开颅。	Extradural clinoidectomy follows a pterional or orbitozygomatic craniotomy.
笔者常将其与扩大翼点入路相联合应用。	I often use extradural anterior clinoidectomy in conjunction with extended pterional craniotomy.
关于该技术在颅底入路中的联合应用的细节，请参阅《眶颧开颅》章节。	Please refer to the Orbitozygomatic Craniotomy chapter for further details regarding incorporation of extradural clinoidectomy in this skull base approach.
关于该技术在动脉瘤夹闭中的应用细节，请参阅《床突旁动脉瘤》章节。	For the use of clinoidectomy for aneurysms, please refer to the paraclinoid aneurysm chapter.
图9：标准扩大翼点开颅已完成。	Figure 9: A standard extended pterional craniotomy has been completed.
已切除翼点、蝶骨大翼和蝶骨小翼，眶周仅残留少量皮质骨。	The pterion, and the greater and lesser sphenoid wings are resected and only a thin cortical bone covers the periorbita.
随后，抬起眶顶后部的硬脑膜，以游离覆盖于前床突的额叶硬脑膜。	Next, the dura is elevated from the posterior roof of the orbit to allow mobilization of the frontal dura over the clinoid.
向前床突方向逐步抬起蝶骨嵴内侧部的硬脑膜。	The dura is progressively mobilized away from the medial sphenoid wing toward the anterior clinoid process.
图10：扩大翼点开颅及磨除眶顶骨质。	Figure 10: The extended pterional craniotomy and drilling of the orbital roof are demonstrated (inset image).
切除蝶骨小翼，即可见该患者增生的前床突及蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤。	Upon resection of the lesser sphenoid wing, the left hypertrophied anterior clinoid process (ACP) in a patient with a medial sphenoid wing meningioma is apparent.
图11：充分抬起蝶骨嵴内侧部硬脑膜之后，进一步分离便受到一膜性结构的限制，该结构即为眶上裂处的外侧额颞硬膜返折（lateral frontotemporal dural fold），也称为眶颞骨膜返折（orbitotemporal periosteal fold），其包含有脑膜眶带（meningoortbital band）（见插图）。	Figure 11: Upon mobilization of the dura over the medial sphenoid wing, further progress to expose the clinoid is interrupted due to tethering of the dura over the superior orbital fissure by the lateral frontotemporal dural fold (also referred to as the orbitotemporal periosteal fold) containing the meningoortbital band (inset image).
笔者切开此带约5mm，随后即在蝶骨嵴附近沿眶上裂将颞窝硬脑膜从海绵窦外侧壁上钝性剥离开。	I section this band for ~5mm.
通过这一关键步骤，可进入颞窝硬脑膜和覆盖于眶上裂的结缔薄膜之间的间隙。	I then bluntly elevate the temporal fossa dura away from the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus along the superior orbital fissure near the sphenoid ridge.
切开眶颞骨膜返折，即可显露眶脑膜动脉，将其电凝后切断。	Once the orbitotemporal periosteal fold is sectioned, the orbitomeningeal artery is identified, coagulated, and severed.
泪腺神经位于该间隙内；海绵窦内的其他颅神经都位于泪腺神经内侧。	The lacrimal nerve travels just medial to this cleavage plane; the cranial nerves within the cavernous sinus are also just medial to this nerve.
因此，切开眶颞骨膜返折不可超过5mm。	Therefore, sectioning of the orbitotemporal periosteal fold beyond 5mm should be avoided.
腰穿脑脊液引流可避免对额颞叶使用固定牵开器。	Cerebrospinal fluid drainage through the lumbar drain obviates the need for fixed retractors on frontal and temporal lobes.
图12：通过钝性剥离，可扩大颞窝硬脑膜和海绵窦外侧壁内层之间的间隙。	Figure 12: Using blunt dissection, I extend the cleavage plane between the temporal fossa dura and the inner layer of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus.
这一步骤可实现前床突后表面的充分暴露。	This maneuver allows excellent exposure of the posterior aspect of the clinoid process.
磨除蝶骨翼内侧部，可离断前床突的外侧部（见插图；红色即为磨除区域）。	Osteotomy of the medial portion of the sphenoid wing disconnects the clinoid from its lateral attachment (inset; the region of osteotomy is shown in red).
图13：在直接磨除前床突之前，还需用小号金刚钻磨除视神经管的背外侧壁，同时注意持续性冲水以避免神经的热损伤。	Figure 13: Before the clinoid process is manipulated, the dorsal and lateral walls of the optic canal are unroofed using a small diamond drill under continuous irrigation to avoid heat injury to the nerve.
“蛋壳化”覆盖视神经的皮质骨，随后用一精细刮匙去除该薄层骨质（左侧插图）。	The cortical bone over the nerve is “egg-shelled” and a fine curette is used to remove this thin layer of bone (left inset image).
禁止直接磨除至神经。	Direct drilling over the nerve is prohibited.
这一步骤磨除后（右侧插图，红色），可将前床突从额侧部离断，并可避免之后处理前床突时对视神经造成的压迫和牵拉。	This osteotomy (right inset image, red) disconnects the process from its frontal attachment and avoids compression or traction injury on the nerve during manipulation of the clinoid.
吸引器始终起到牵开硬脑膜的作用。	The suction apparatus maintains dynamic retraction on the dura.
图14：充分暴露视神经后，笔者使用金刚钻磨除前床突中央的松质骨，而对周边皮质骨行“蛋壳化”。	Figure 14: With a clear view of the optic nerve, I use the diamond burr to core out the central cancellous bone and “egg-shell” the remaining cortical bone of the clinoid process.
这一步骤离断了前床突与视柱之间的最后联系（插图）。	This maneuver disconnects the final attachment of the process to the optic strut (inset image).
在磨除前外侧部时，需注意对动眼神经的保护。	The cranial nerve III should be protected during anterolateral drilling.
图15：用刮匙折断残余的“蛋壳化”的前床突并取出。	Figure 15: The remaining shell of the clinoid is fractured by a curette and delivered.
这一残余部分与床突间韧带和岩前床突韧带之间的粘连需进行仔细的钝性分离。	Careful blunt dissection and manipulation of this remaining portion is often required for its release from the inter- and petroclinoid ligaments.
对视神经的直视可避免对其的损伤。	A clear view of the optic nerve allows the surgeon to avoid injuring it.
用垂体钳取出最后的骨片（左下方插图）。	A pituitary rongeur is used to pull out the loose fragment (lower left inset image).
静脉性出血可用凝血酶浸泡后的明胶海绵适量压迫来轻易控制。	Venous bleeding from the cavernous sinus is easily controlled by judicial packing of thrombin-soaked gelfoam.
过量的填塞压迫则可使遮挡切除前床突获得的空间，因此需要避免。	Overpachking is not advised so that the additional space gained by the clinoidectomy is not obliterated.
图16：硬膜外前床突切除术的最终视野，透过硬脑膜可见床突段颈内动脉。	Figure 16: Completed view of an extradural anterior clinoidectomy with localization of the clinoidal ICA through the dura.
硬膜内视角可显示去除的骨质（插图）。	An intradural view of the extent of bony removal is evident (inset image).
随后的硬膜内步骤，将切开镰状韧带和远环，从而在颅底分别对视神经和颈内动脉游离并移位。	During the subsequent intradural portions of the operation, the falciform ligament and the distal dural ring can be transected to liberate and mobilize the optic nerve and carotid artery at the skull base, respectively.
图17：术中照片显示硬膜外前床突切除术后暴露的左侧视神经（上图）。	Figure 17: Intraoperative photo demonstrates the extradural exposure of the left optic nerve after clinoidectomy (top image).
硬膜内切开镰状韧带显露视神经至进入眶内（下图）。	Intradural transection of the falciform ligament reveals the length of the optic nerve as it enters the orbit (bottom image).
镰状韧带压迫并移位神经的区域明显可见（*）。	The area of compression and discoloration of the nerve by the ligament is apparent (*).
若对于前床突气化有所顾虑，可在硬膜缝合后，使用一小片颞肌填补前床突骨质缺损，并用纤维蛋白胶加固。	If there is concern about a pneumatized anterior clinoid process, a small piece of temporalis muscle may be placed within the clinoidectomy bony defect and reinforced with fibrin glue after dural closure.
监测患者有无脑脊液鼻漏、视力改变及复视。	The patient is monitored for CSF rhinorrhea, changes in visual acuity, and diplopia.
术后鼻漏的处理首选短期腰椎引流，该处理常可有效控制脑脊液漏。	Postoperative rhinorrhea is first managed by temporary lumbar drainage. This maneuver is often effective for cessation of the leak.
如果无效，则需再次行手术填补前床突骨质缺损。	If this is not effective, the patient is returned to the operating room for repacking of the clinoidectomy defect.
· 术前需注意前床突气化和韧带骨化等变异。	Be aware of clinoid pneumatization and ligament ossification before deciding to complete a clinoidectomy.
· 笔者切开外侧眶颞骨膜返折约5mm，随后即在蝶骨嵴附近沿眶上裂将颞窝硬脑膜从海绵窦外侧壁上钝性剥离开。	I section the lateral orbitotemporal periosteal fold for ~5mm. I then bluntly elevate the temporal fossa dura away from the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus along the superior orbital fissure near the sphenoid ridge.
这一步骤可充分显露前床突，也是进行前床突切除术的关键。	This maneuver provides an excellent view of the clinoid process and is the key maneuver in execution of a clinoidectomy.
· 蛋壳化前床突能保证操作的安全。	Egg-shelling the clinoid process is a safe method of clinoidectomy.
· 严重骨化的肿瘤需要耗费大量冗长的时间和精力进行磨除：笔者建议对这些病例采取硬膜内前床突切除术。	Excessively hyperostotic tumors make drilling a tedious endeavour: I suggest an intradural clinoidectomy in these cases.
· 避免整块切除前床突。	En bloc resection of the clinoid process should be avoided.
硬膜内前床突切除术	Intradural Clinoidectomy
前床突切除术是脑血管及颅底外科中的重要技术之一，其最根本的意义在于充分显露近端颈内动脉、视神经、蝶鞍和中央颅底。	Anterior clinoidectomy is an important tool for neurovascular and skull base surgery. This technique is cardinal in expanding access to the sella, proximal carotid artery, and central skull base.
切除前床突可显露颈内动脉眼动脉段的近端和床突段，并同时轮廓化视神经近端；并可通过安全地部分游离、松解和移位颈内动脉和视神经，扩大视神经-颈内动脉间隙和颈内动脉-动眼神经间隙，进而更好地显露脚间池。	The goal of anterior clinoidectomy is to the reveal the more proximal ophthalmic and clinoidal segments of the internal carotid artery (ICA) while unroofing the optic canal and skeletonizing the proximal optic nerve.  This maneuver expands the optico-carotid and carotid-oculomotor access windows and therefore the operative corridor to the interpeduncular cisterns. Both the carotid artery and optic nerve are partially untethered and can be more safely and gently mobilized.
目前的争议主要在于运用该项技术的适应症，以及关于硬膜外或者硬膜内进行操作的利弊。	Controversy surrounds the value of clinoidectomy for “appropriately selected” cases. Moreover, there is no consensus on the indications and benefits of extradural versus intradural clinoidectomy.
各种改良术式的报道也使得该技术变得“复杂化”，从而消磨了部分神经外科医师对于掌握该技术的热情。	Many reports of modified variations of clinoidectomy have complicated the technical complexity of this osteotomy and have further dampened some of my colleagues’ enthusiasm for adopting this technique.
硬膜外前床突切除术的适应症和优势有：	The indications and advantages of extradural clinoidecomy are:
2.对于有适应症的病变，磨除的技术和范围很少有变异。	This maneuver is less selective and more inclusive for various pathologies.
3.该技术尤其适用于蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤，术中早期即可实现控制肿瘤基底和视神经减压的目的，可切除肿瘤浸润化的前床突，而对视神经的早期减压也可减少在处理肿瘤主体过程中对神经的牵拉损伤。	It is more beneficial for resection of medial sphenoid wing meningiomas as it allows early devascularization of the tumor and decompression of optic nerve. The tumor-infiltrated clinoid can be removed. Upon early decompression of the nerve, further tumor manipulation may not place the nerve at risk of traction injury.
硬膜内前床突切除术的适应症和优势有：	The indications and advantages of intradural clinoidecomy are:
1.该技术需要切除的前床突骨质较少，但磨除骨质时，有损伤周边硬膜内结构的风险。	The intradural space allows limited osteotomy of the clinoid while the intradural structures are potentially at risk during drilling and are exposed to bone dust.
3.该技术适用于眼动脉和床突旁动脉瘤的夹闭，磨除范围可根据实际需要而定。由于直视硬膜内结构，故可避免导致动脉瘤术中破裂的操作。	It is desirable for clip ligation of ophthalmic and paraclinoid artery aneurysms since bony removal can be tailored and clinoidectomy can be executed under careful monitoring of the aneurysm to prevent manipulations that could potentially place the aneurysm at risk of intraoperative rupture.
前床突部分切除术在处理近端后交通动脉瘤时也是必须的。	Partial clinoidectomy may also be necessary for proximal posterior communicating (P-Comm) artery aneurysms.
硬膜内前床突切除术引起脑脊液鼻漏的概率较硬膜外操作小，原因一在于，早期即进入硬膜内探明病变解剖，可避免一部分不必要的前床突切除术；原因二在于，根据具体需要来磨除部分前床突，避免了整个前床突的切除。	An intradural clinoidectomy may be associated with a smaller risk of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea for two reasons. First, by performing an early intradural inspection of the pathoanatomy, a clinoidectomy may be deemed unnecessary. Second, a partial clinoidectomy tailored to the pathology at hand may obviate the need for a complete clinoidectomy.
因此，硬膜内操作可避免不必要的骨质磨除，减少破坏蝶窦甚至是筛窦的机会。	These two factors may lead to a decreased need for osteotomy and subsequent violation of the sphenoid and even the ethmoid sinuses.
另外，关于动眼神经损伤的风险，也是硬膜内较硬膜外操作略为安全，其原因可能在于前者能在早期即磨除前床突内侧的骨质。	The risk of oculomotor nerve injury may also be slightly decreased with extradural clinoid resection. This difference may be due to medial bone removal early in surgery during an intradural versus extradural clinoidectomy.
动脉瘤顶与前床突硬脑膜相粘连是硬膜外前床突切除术的禁忌症。	Adherence of the aneurysm dome to the clinoidal dura is a contraindication for extradural clinoidectomy.
此外，动脉瘤顶侵蚀床突骨质，以及存在颈内动脉床突孔，均需要使用硬膜内技术。	In addition, erosion of the clinoid by the aneurysm dome and the presence of carotidoclinoid foramen demand an intradural technique.
最终，术者的偏好和熟悉度也是决定硬膜外还是硬膜内进行操作的重要因素。	Ultimately, surgeon’s preference and comfort level dictates “which side of the dura” is entered to execute anterior clinoidectomy.
笔者偏向于硬膜外，原因就在于我对这一入路更为熟悉。	I prefer the extradural approach due to my experience level with this procedure.
我也偏向于尽量避免在硬膜内进行磨钻的操作，以减少损伤周围结构的风险。	I also prefer to avoid drilling within the intradural space if at all possible to minimize the risk of injury to the neighboring structures.
值得注意的是，硬膜内前床突切除术可根据打开硬膜后观察到的病变具体情况来决定前床突磨除的范围，因此下述的步骤并非全部必须。	Note that intradural clinoidectomy can be tailored and not all the steps mentioned below are mandatory.  Initial intradural inspection of the lesion dictates the need for the extent of clinoid osteotomy.
术前CT需评估前床突气化程度，这将为术中填塞骨质缺损提供依据，以避免脑脊液漏。	The extent of clinoid aeration (pneumatized clinoid) may be evaluated on preoperative CT scan and predicts the need for more robust plugging of the bony defect after clinoidectomy to avoid a CSF fistula.
薄层CT的另一目的是明确有无床突韧带的骨化，尤其是颈内动脉床突韧带和床突间韧带。	Thin-slice CT also determines the ossification of the clinoidal ligaments, specially the carticoclinoid and interclinoid ligaments.
关于这部分的详细内容，请参见《硬膜外前床突切除术》章节。	For further details on the anatomical variations of the anterior clinoid process, please refer to the Extradural Clinoidectomy chapter.
对于位于近端的床突旁动脉瘤，尤其是已破裂动脉瘤，必须仔细解剖瘤颈，以实现颈内动脉近端控制，并可为夹闭瘤颈做好准备。	In the case of proximal paraclinoid aneurysms, control over the ICA must be established via neck dissection and the neck area is prepared, especially in the case of ruptured aneurysms.
动脉瘤颈是否累及颈内动脉远环的近端侧需通过术前CT血管成像来明确。	Extension of the aneurysm neck proximal to the distal dural ring should be assessed on a preoperative CT angiogram.
尽管通过切除前床突、打开远环，可获得几毫米的额外空间来暴露瘤颈，但对于一些瘤颈显著扩张深入海绵窦内的情况，开颅显微夹闭是很难实施的。	Although following clinoidectomy, opening of the outer dural ring provides access to additional few millimeters of aneurysm neck, significant extension of certain paraclinoid aneurysm necks into the cavernous sinus precludes the use of an open microsurgical route for clip ligation.
图1：该动脉瘤的部分瘤颈被前床突遮蔽。	Figure 1:  The neck of this aneurysm was partially concealed by the clinoid process.
硬膜内前床突切除术则可显露瘤颈以行夹闭。	An intradural clinoidectomy was subsequently performed to disclose the neck of the aneurysm for clip application.
请参见下面的图片。	Please refer to the images below.
这一区域的界限如下：上界和外侧界为额颞部硬脑膜，前界和下界为眶筋膜和视柱。	The frontotemporal dura defines the superior and lateral borders to the clinoid while the periorbita and optic strut limit the anterior and inferior borders.
后界的外下部，向前穿行入眶上裂的神经血管结构覆盖于一层膜性结构的深面。	Inferolaterally, the neurovascular structures of the cavernous sinus lie under a layer of periosteal dura emerging anteriorly into the superior orbital fissure.
去除前床突时有损伤这些结构的风险。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	These vital structures are at risk during mobilization of the process (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
由于该区域神经血管结构非常密集，因此通过移位某些神经和关键血管来扩大手术间隙显得尤其重要。	Given the large number of neurovascular structures in this region, the importance of any additional created space or mobility of any nerves or key vessels is immediately apparent clinically.
接下来的图片将重点展示离断前床突所必须的三个步骤：	The following images emphasize three osteotomies required for disconnection of the clinoid
沿蝶骨嵴内侧部磨除，以离断前床突外侧部；	Osteotomy along the medial lesser sphenoid wing to disconnect the lateral connection
沿眶顶壁磨除，以离断前床突前部和内侧部；	Osteotomy along the orbital roof to disconnect the anterior connection
完成上述三个步骤后，蛋壳化的前床突可移位并从各床突韧带上游离下来。	After the completion of the above three steps, the shell of clinoid can be mobilized and dissected away from the clinoidal ligaments.
图3：对于硬膜内前床突切除术，在硬膜外磨除蝶骨小翼并轮廓化眶上裂是扩大翼点开颅步骤的一部分（绿色）。	Figure 3: For an intradural clinoidectomy, the lesser sphenoid wing is removed and the superior orbital fissure may be skeletonized through the extradural approach as part of the extended pterional craniotomy (green).
因此，硬膜内前床突切除术的第一步，包括沿着蝶骨嵴离断前床突的外侧部，实际上是在硬膜外完成的。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	Therefore, the first step in intradural clinoidectomy, involving osteotomy along the sphenoid ridge to disconnect the lateral connection of the clinoid, is actually performed extradurally (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4：步骤二，沿视神经管顶壁及额骨内侧（粉色）磨除，以离断前床突前部和内侧部；	Figure 4: The second step involves osteotomy along the roof of the optic nerve and frontal bone medially (pink) to disconnect the anterior and medial connections of the clinoid.
视神经减压也可在移位前床突而牵拉神经的过程中起到保护神经的作用。	This decompression of the nerve protects the nerve from any traction injury during mobilization of the clinoid.
步骤三，在前床突内部行“蛋壳化”磨除，使其与前下方的视柱（绿色）相离断。	The last osteotomy comprises of drilling within the clinoid to create an “egg shell” and disconnect the anteroinferior connection to the optic strut (green).
这两步骤是在硬膜内进行的。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	These last two steps are conducted intradurally (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
硬膜内前床突切除术	INTRADURAL ANTERIOR CLINOIDECTOMY
该区域的大多数动脉瘤和肿瘤，均可根据其病变特点，通过标准翼点或眶颧开颅暴露。	Most aneurysms and tumors arising from this region can be accessed via a standard pterional or orbitozygomatic craniotomy tailored to their specific configuration.
在硬膜外磨除蝶骨小翼并轮廓化眶上裂可作为标准或扩大翼点开颅步骤的一部分。	The lesser sphenoid wing is removed and the superior orbital fissure may be skeletonized through the extradural approach as part of the standard or extended pterional craniotomy.
图5：对于巨大床突旁动脉瘤，首先需打开侧裂，显露视神经和颈内动脉分叉部。	Figure 5: In large paraclinoid aneurysms, the Sylvian fissure is split and the optic nerve and ICA bifurcation identified.
如同该例右侧病例显示的，动脉瘤瘤颈的近端部分常常被前床突遮挡。	In this right-sided approach, the proximal neck of the aneurysm is often partly concealed by the anterior clinoid process.
十字切开前床突硬脑膜；必要时，切口可根据病变情况向更外侧或更内侧延长（插图）。	The clinoid dura is incised in a cruciate fashion; this incision may be extended more laterally or medially if necessary as dictated by the underlying pathology (inset).
图6：笔者通常沿蝶骨小翼向外侧切开切开硬脑膜，直至之前硬膜外切除蝶骨嵴的内侧界（上图，蓝色虚线）。	Figure 6: I usually incise the dura along the lesser sphenoid wing to the edge of the prior extradural ridge resection (top image, hashed blue line).
第二个垂直的硬脑膜切口可延伸至镰状韧带。	A second perpendicular dural incision may involve the falciform ligament.
牵开硬脑膜辦可显露前床突内侧部（下图）。	Retraction of the dural leaflets exposes the medial clinoid (bottom image).
图7：另一种切开硬脑膜的方法，即作一横跨镰状韧带、连接前床突外侧缘和视神经管内侧部的矩形或H形切口（黑色虚线）。	Figure 7: As an alternative, dural opening can be performed over the bone on the lateral aspect of the anterior clinoid and the medial aspect of the optic canal through the falciform ligament in a rectangular or H-shaped fashion (hashed black line).
随后可将硬脑膜辦下翻而覆盖于神经血管上方，以起到保护作用。	The dural flap is then reflected over the neurovascular structures in order to protect them.
切除前床突后再将硬脑膜辦翻转复位并闭合，以减少脑脊液漏的风险。（感谢AL Rhoton, Jr教授对图片的授权）	After clinoidectomy, the dural flap is reflected back and sealed to decrease the the risk of a CSF leak (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图8：使用金刚钻，在持续冲水下磨除前床突。	Figure 8: Using a diamond burr and constant irrigation, the clinoid process is cored out.
也可使用超声骨凿。	Alternatively, an ultrasonic bone curette may be used.
这一步骤中，骨质磨除的范围可根据需要而定，目的是充分暴露出被前床突遮挡的近端部分瘤颈。	At this juncture, the extent of bony removal can be exactly tailored to expose the residual concealed proximal neck of the aneurysm.
需保留一薄层骨壳作为保护颈内动脉和动脉瘤的安全界面。	A thin shell of bone is left in order to maintain a safe border around the ICA and aneurysm.
内侧硬脑膜辦也起到了保护这些重要结构的作用。	The medial leaflet of the dura further protects the vital structures.
在本示意图中，只需磨除内侧少量的前床突骨质即可实现瘤颈的充分暴露，因此无需行完全性的前床突切除术。	In this sketch, a limited medial clinoidectomy will be adequate to expose the aneurysm neck; a complete clinoidectomy is not necessary.
对于那些动脉瘤侵蚀前床突并与之粘连的病例，需保留一薄层骨片于瘤顶，随后即将注意力集中在瘤颈的暴露。	In the case of patients whose aneurysm is eroding through and adherent to the clinoid, a thin layer of bone is left on the aneurysm dome and the focus of attention is turned to exposing the aneurysm neck.
图9：前床突内部已被充分磨除；该操作即可使其与视神经管和视柱相离断。	Figure 9: The clinoid is thoroughly cored out; this maneuver leads to disconnection of the clinoid from the optic canal and strut.
残余的薄层骨壳可从各床突韧带上钝性分离并去除。	The residual thin shell of bone is bluntly separated from the clinoidal ligaments and delivered.
静脉性出血可通过脑棉及小片凝血酶化的明胶海绵轻轻压迫来轻易控制。	Venous bleeding from the cavernous sinus is easily controlled with a small piece of thrombin soaked gelfoam powder and gentle pressure by the cottonoid patty.
经过这一前床突内侧部切除术后，即可充分暴露极端部分的瘤颈，此时即可行动脉瘤夹闭（上图，插图）。	The final result of this medial clinoidectomy is access to the more proximal neck of the aneurysm that is now available for clip application (top image, inset).
在瘤颈部也可实现颈内动脉近端控制。	Proximal control over the ICA was obtained at the neck.
必要时，可继续沿着颈内动脉壁进行分离，暴露并切开远环，以显露颈内动脉床突段。	If necessary, dissection may be continued along the walls of the ICA, the distal dural ring exposed and sectioned to access the clinoidal segment of the ICA.
图10：一例右侧巨大后交通动脉瘤的术中图片，瘤颈的近端部分已被充分显露。	Figure 10:  An intraoperative photo demonstrates access to the proximal neck of the large right-sided posterior communicating artery aneurysm.
若对于前床突气化有所顾虑，可在硬膜缝合后，使用一小片颞肌填补前床突骨质缺损，并用纤维蛋白胶加固。	If there is concern about a pneumatized clinoid, a small piece of temporalis muscle may be placed within the defect and reinforced with a small amount of fibrin glue.
其余硬膜按常规缝合。	The rest of the dura is closed in a standard fashion.
术后鼻漏的处理首选短期腰椎引流，该处理常可有效控制脑脊液漏。	Postoperative rhinorrhea is first managed through temporary lumbar drainage. This maneuver is often effective for cessation of the leak if the fistula is suspected at the level of clinoid resection.
如果无效，则需再次行手术填补前床突骨质缺损。	If not effective, the patient will be returned to the operating room for repacking of the clinoidectomy defect.
笔者还是偏好硬膜外前床突切除术。	Extradural clinoidectomy is my preferred method.
但对于粘连于硬脑膜的床突旁动脉瘤、伴有严重骨质增生的肿瘤、床突韧带存在骨化变异，硬膜内前床突切除术或联合入路更为合理。	For paraclinoid aneurysms adherent to the dura, tumors associated with highly hyperostotic bone, or patients with ossification of clinoid ligaments, an intradural clinoidectomy or combined approach is more reasonable.
“蛋壳化”内侧部前床突能保证前床突切除术的安全。	Egg-shelling” the medial clinoid is a safe method of performing a tailored clinoidectomy.
无论使用何种技术来切除前床突（磨钻或超声骨凿），操持充足的冲洗是防止视神经热损伤的最重要环节。	Regardless of the technique used for clinoidectomy (drilling or ultrasonic bone curettes), copious irrigation is paramount to avoid thermal injury to the optic nerve.
切除内侧部前床突之后，还可根据病变具体情况将磨除范围向视柱、蝶骨小翼和视神经管顶壁扩展。	Once the medial clinoidectomy is performed, bony removal can be extended to the optic strut, lesser sphenoid wing and roof of the optic nerve. These maneuvers can be carried out based on the location and features of the pathology at hand.
脑组织牵拉移动与保护	Brain Mobilization and Protection
图1. 在额下入路时分别使用固定牵开器（左图）和动态牵拉（右图）显露视神经示意图，动态牵拉一般使用双极电凝和吸引器，作用力分布广泛，可以使脑组织表面受到的拉力更小。	Figure 1: The use of a fixed retractor blade (left) and dynamic retraction (using bipolar forceps and suction device, right) for a subfrontal trajectory and exposure of the optic nerve is compared.  Dynamic retraction places the brain under less tension due to a more distributed retraction pressure.
动脉瘤手术多在基底池周围进行，需要牵拉脑组织，以获得更好的角度解剖蛛网膜下腔，分离相关的血管结构和动脉瘤。	Aneurysm surgery takes place around the basal cisterns, and therefore requires brain mobilization to facilitate a suitable subarachnoid trajectory for dissection of the relevant vascular territories and the aneurysm.
虽然使用固定牵开器有助于解放外科医生的双手，使其专注于更深部的手术操作，然而这样的牵拉可能造成潜在的脑损伤，应当有选择性的、审慎的使用。	Although fixed retractor blades are helpful in freeing the surgeon’s hands so he or she can conduct the deeper portions of the dissection, this form of retraction comes at the price of potential brain injury and should be very selectively and judiciously applied.
使用固定牵开器造成脑实质性损伤的机制有两种。	Parenchymal injury during fixed retraction arises from two pathophysiologic mechanisms.
首先，牵开器叶片可对脑组织造成直接压力损伤，导致血肿和/或坏死。	First, the force of the retractor blade on the brain may cause direct damage resulting in a hematoma and/or necrosis.
第二，牵开器叶片边缘的压力梯度可以封闭局部的血管，导致缺血性损伤。这类损伤在手术过程中可能不明显，但会影响病人长期的神经系统预后。	Second, the pressure gradient across the edges of the retractor blade may occlude the regional blood vessels, resulting in ischemic injury that may not manifest during the operation, but will produce long-term neurologic consequences for the patient.
笔者积极地试图避免使用固定牵开器，因为这样的固定牵拉无法感知到脑组织的阻力或顺应性。	I actively attempt to avoid fixed retractor blades because this form of retraction does not constantly sense the resistance or compliance of the brain.
另一方面，通过吸引器进行动态牵拉，可使术者实时感知到牵拉时脑组织的阻力	On the other hand, dynamic retraction via the suction device continuously updates the surgeon regarding the resistance of the brain to mobilization.
笔者已经避免使用“牵拉”这个说法，更倾向于使用“动态移动“。	I have avoided the term “retraction” and prefer to use the term “dynamic mobilization.
动态是指基于大脑反馈和显微外科手术需求，使用手术器械而非固定牵开器叶片进行不断变化的主动温和牵拉。	” Dynamic refers to ever-changing gentle retraction based on the feedback of the brain and the active demands of microsurgery, using instruments rather than static blades.
这些概念在下面章节中将进行详细解释。	These concept are further reviewed in the following pragraphs.
手术条件	Operative Conditions
动脉瘤性蛛网膜下腔出血后几个小时到几天后，脑组织常处于水肿，变紧，易碎的状态，给显微手术操作带来困难。	In the hours and days immediately following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH,) the brain is often edematous, tight, and friable, making microsurgical maneuverability difficult and nonpristine.
根据以往的观念，脑组织牵拉困难和随之带来的手术并发症是选择延期手术的主要原因，一般选择在蛛网膜下腔出血7-10天后才进行手术。	Historically, difficult brain mobilization and related surgical complications were major factors in favor of performing late surgery, 7-10 days after the initial hemorrhage.
根据最近的报道，延期手术的效果并不确切；因此早期干预再次受到重视。早期干预有助于防止动脉瘤再出血（这是首次动脉瘤出血幸存的患者死亡的主要原因）。	More recent reports claim that late surgery results in equivocal outcomes; this has led to earlier intervention in order to prevent aneurysmal rebleeding, a major cause of mortality among patients who survive the initial hemorrhage.
这一理念也推动了安全动脉瘤在血管痉挛期采用高血容量、高血压疗法。	This philosophy also facilitates the use of hypervolemia and hypertension treatment in the presence of a secured aneurysm during the vasospasm period.
脑组织牵拉前和牵拉期间均应采取适当的措施。	Proper measures should be undertaken before and during the retraction process.
低血压和过度通气应避免与脑组织牵拉联合使用，	The use of hypotension and hyperventilation along with brain retraction should be avoided.
否则会降低脑灌注压，降低牵开器的压力梯度阈值，引起明显的缺血。	These modalities decrease cerebral perfusion pressure, reducing the threshold of the retractor’s pressure gradient that is necessary to cause significant ischemia.
此外，有些麻醉药也会降低脑血流量，直接影响了脑组织牵拉的持续时间和力度。	Additionally, certain volatile anesthetics reduce cerebral blood flow and thereby directly affect how long and at what force retraction should be applied.
甘露醇有助于减少脑水肿，同时保持脑组织的灌注。	Mannitol is beneficial and reduces brain edema while maintaining perfusion.
要达到更好的给药效果，甘露醇应当长时间，小剂量的反复给药，而非手术时单次给药。	Mannitol may be more efficacious via prolonged, small, repeated dosing as opposed to bolus dosing at the time of surgery.
低温能够降低神经组织的代谢率，也有助于预防脑实质的缺血。	Hypothermia is also useful in the prevention of parenchymal ischemia because it reduces the metabolic rate of the neural tissues.
手术经验丰富的外科医生可以通过更小的暴露完成更多的手术操作。	Operative experience enables the surgeon to achieve more through less generous exposures.
脑组织牵拉	Brain Mobilization
正确摆放病人头位十分重要，通过解剖蛛网膜，可以最有效的利用重力移动脑组织。	Appropriate patient’s head positioning is important for arachnoid dissection to mobilize the brain most effectively using gravity.
在翼点入路时伸展颈部（头后仰）、大脑纵裂入路使用侧卧位，就是两个典型的例子。	Neck extension and lateral head positioning during pterional and interhemispheric craniotomies, respectively, are examples of this approach.
在移动脑叶时，要彻底分开脑裂，将蛛网膜下腔的系带完全松解，避免对脑组织表面产生张力。	The corresponding fissures are split and all subarachnoid bands lysed to prevent tension on the parenchymal surface during displacement of the lobe.
初始的操作策略很重要，因为可以了解局部神经血管的解剖。	The initial dissection strategy is important because it localizes the relevant neurovascular anatomy.
术者必须防止用固定牵开器或吸引器将动脉直接阻断，	The surgeon must prevent direct occlusion of an artery by the retractor blade or suction device.
牵开器对动脉分支血管远端的牵拉会导致其在术中荧光造影时无法显影，影响对血管通畅性的判断。	Direct distal retraction on a branching artery with the retractor blade can also lead to confusion about its patency during intraoperative fluorescence angiography.
（蛛网膜下腔）出血的类型直接影响着脑组织对牵拉的反应。	The type of bleed that has occurred directly affects how the brain will respond to the vector of mobilization.
如果存在颅内血肿，动脉瘤的瘤顶很可能会与血凝块粘在一起。	If an intraparenchymal clot is present, the aneurysm dome is likely to adhere to the clot.
对脑组织的过分牵拉可能会弄破瘤顶，导致术中动脉瘤破裂。	Aggressive mobilization of a tense brain may detach the aneurysm dome, resulting in an intraoperative aneurysm rupture.
为防止和处理这样的情况，一般只做血肿的部分减压，辅以确切的近端控制。	Partial clot decompression and suitable proximal control should prevent and manage such a rupture.
动脉瘤瘤顶可能与周围结构发生粘连；如大脑中动脉瘤可粘附于颞叶的侧裂面，指向下方的前交通动脉瘤可粘附于视交叉，指向侧方的后交通动脉瘤可粘附于颞叶内侧面，小脑后下动脉瘤可粘附于岩骨硬膜。	Aneurysm domes may adhere to the structures around them; these structures include the Sylvian surface of the temporal lobe in middle cerebral artery aneurysms, the optic chiasm in inferiorly pointing anterior communicating artery aneurysms, the medial temporal lobe in laterally pointing posterior communicating artery aneurysms, and the petrous dura in posterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysms.
在分离初期，特别是完成近端控制并理清周围血管解剖前，牵拉应格外小心，避免撕脱瘤顶（造成术中破裂）。	The vector of retraction must avoid avulsing the dome early in dissection until proximal control is reliably secured and the vascular anatomy is understood.
固定牵拉	Fixed Retraction
虽然笔者一贯反对使用固定牵开器，并尽量减少其使用，但仍有一些情况下需要临时使用固定牵开器，有时甚至是必要的。比如：	Although I am generally against fixed retraction and minimize its use when possible, there are some circumstances when the transient use of fixed retractor blades is prudent and even potentially necessary:
①固定牵开器可临时将脑组织托住（而非牵开），以显露手术区域，比如一个右利手的外科医生正在处理一个深部的左侧动脉瘤，反之亦然。	to transiently hold (but not retract) the brain out of the operative zone, especially if a right-handed surgeon is approaching a deep left-sided aneurysm and vice versa,
②当吸引器用来协助完成动脉瘤最终夹闭动作时，固定牵开器可做为”第三只手”临时牵开一小部分脑组织。	to temporarily retract a small portion of the brain as a “third hand” while the suction device is used to manipulate the aneurysm during final permanent clip application,
③在外侧裂和更深部的区域进行血管吻合时，固定牵开器可帮助术者获得双手操作空间。	and to complete anastomoses within the Sylvian fissure and deeper spaces.
在上述这些情况下，术者使用吸引器的方向与脑组织需要被牵开的方向并不一致。	In these instances, the direction of the shaft of the suction apparatus may not coincide with the vector of retraction.
为了在手术区域精确的使用吸引器头，术者就不能用吸引器作为动态牵拉装置，而需引入固定牵开器。	Precise manipulation of the surgical target using the suction tip may prohibit the use of the suction device as a dynamic retractor.
笔者认为固定牵开器的作用是“托举”或“保护”，而不是牵拉。	I consider the function of the retractor blade to be a “holder” or “protector” rather than a retractor.
牵开器不应“压迫”紧绷的脑组织来创造手术空间。	The retractor blade should not be used to “fight” the tight brain and create operative space.
这样会导致自发性皮层静脉出血，术后影像学检查可见明显的牵拉损伤。	Such a maneuver leads to spontaneous cortical venous bleeding and retraction injury that will be apparent on the postoperative scans.
牵开器臂应放置在手术区域以下，	The retractor arms should be positioned so that they come up from below the level of the operative field.
若牵开器臂高于手术区域时，一方面会挤占手术空间，另一方面可能导致不经意的位移（造成脑组织损伤）。	Placement of the arms above the operative field crowds the surgical space and facilitates their inadvertent displacement.
在牵开器叶片和脑表面之间应垫上Tefla条，防止叶片尖锐的边缘损伤软脑膜。	Tefla strips should be used as padding between the retractor blades and the brain surface to prevent the sharp edges of the blades from causing pial injury.
即使确实需要长时间牵拉，也需要间断松开牵开器，这样可以促进再灌注，降低缺血风险。	If prolonged retraction is absolutely required, transient retraction-free periods are necessary. The intermittent release of retraction facilitates reperfusion and reduces the risk of ischemia.
只有手术区域确实需要时才应使用牵开器进行暴露;不建议使用多个牵开器。	Only the exact working area should be exposed through the blades; the use of multiple retractors is not advised.
动态牵拉	Dynamic Retraction
通过对手术入路、病人体位的合理规划，显微外科操作应当将外源性的脑损伤降至最低水平。	Microsurgical dissection must minimize extraneous brain injuries and transgression through proper planning of the operative approach and patient positioning.
术前计划的一些关键因素包括使用重力牵拉，扩大颅骨切除范围，松解脑组织，蛛网膜充分解剖等，最重要的是：有策略、渐进性地使用动态牵拉技术，在处理病变的同时，保护好正常脑组织。	Some of the key factors in successful operative planning are the use of gravity retraction, enhanced bone removal, brain relaxation, wide arachnoid dissection, and most importantly, strategic use of dynamic retraction and handling of the normal brain during manipulation of the surgical target.
在手术操作过程中，显微操作器械，特别是吸引器可以用作“动态牵拉器”，牵开部分脑组织。	The microinstruments within the operative field and, more specifically, the suction device may be used as “dynamic retractors” to briefly displace small areas of the brain tissue.
吸引器的体部和头部可进行两种不同方式的牵拉。	The shaft and tip of the suction apparatus may be used to retract in two ways.
首先，吸引器头可以在显微操作的局部区域施加张力。	First, the suction tip applies tension where the microdissection is taking place.
其次，吸引器体部可以用于牵开手术视野近端（浅部），如进入手术视野的脑组织。	Second, the shaft of the suction mobilizes the more proximal portions of the brain that may obstruct operative viewing.
吸力强度可以通过小孔进行调节，确保血管不被吸入，	The suction strength is modulated by changing the amount of airflow so that the fine pial vessels are not pulled into the bore of the suction device.
必要时双极电凝和显微剪也可用于牵拉。	The bipolar forceps and microscissors may also be used for retraction when necessary.
通常情况下，术者并不会将某一个器械固定作为动态牵开器，而是会把双手使用的器进行协同操作。	Most frequently, it is not one device that acts as the dynamic retractor but rather the interaction of both devices at hand.
动态牵拉技术的使用有一个学习曲线。	There is a learning curve involved in routine use of dynamic retraction.
此外，动态牵拉对于病变的暴露是有限的，术者必须对病变周围的解剖了然于心，才能在有限的手术视野内游刃有余。	In addition, the exposure of the pathology is somewhat limited; the operator has to work around this limitation with detailed anatomical understanding of the pathology.
过去几年，笔者渐渐放弃了固定牵开器的使用，因为牵开器叶片常常影响手术操作，它对脑组织的牵拉是死板的，无法满足手术过程中动态变化的显露要求。	I gradually abandoned the use of retractor blades within the past years as I found the blades to be often interfering with my surgical maneuvers. The blades exert a very inflexible vector of retraction. This constant vector of retraction is not able to interact with the momentous demands for operative exposure at the exact site of dissection.
事实上，在深而狭窄的操作角度下，宽大的牵开器甚至会对周围软脑膜表面产生张力，削弱分离效果。	In fact, the broad blade can sometimes compromise dissection within deep narrow operative corridors by creating tension on the wall of surrounding pial surfaces.
最后，对手术入路进行详细规划，尽可能移除颅底阻碍手术操作的骨质（如蝶翼，床突、岩尖和髁状突），有助于达到更好的手术显露，减少固定牵开器的使用。	Finally, the avoidance of retractor blades requires a properly planned craniotomy and removal of bony skull base obstacles. These obstacles include the sphenoid wing, clinoid, petrous apex, and the condyle.
经验和教训	Pearls and Pitfalls
· 掌握动态牵拉技术有一个学习曲线。	Mastery of the techniques of dynamic retraction involves a learning curve.
这一技术可以避免手术操作过程中不必要的神经血管损害。	This technique has the potential to prevent unintended neurovascular injury.
脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤	Anterior Choroidal Artery Aneurysm
颈内动脉后壁的动脉瘤，也就是脉络膜前动脉和后交通动脉动脉瘤，是颅内最高发的动脉瘤，约占所有颅内动脉瘤的35%。	Aneurysms of the posterior wall of the internal carotid artery (ICA,) namely the anterior choroidal artery (AChA) and posterior communicating artery (PCoA) aneurysms, represent the most common site for intracranial aneurysms (up to 35% of total aneurysms.)
脉络膜前动脉，源自颈内动脉床突上段的后交通动脉后外侧数毫米的位置，血管管径较小，分支较多，供应很多重要结构血供，比如内囊后肢、基底核、视束、大脑脚、外侧膝状体及边缘系统等。	The AChA arises a few millimeters distal and slightly lateral to the origin of the PCoA from the supraclinoid ICA. It has a slightly smaller caliber, can immediately branch after its origin, and supplies very important territories, such as the posterior limb of the internal capsule, basal ganglia, optic apparatus, cerebral peduncle, lateral geniculate body, and limbic system.
脉络膜前动脉供血区的侧支循环差，所以在脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤夹闭时应注意切勿夹闭脉络膜前动脉。	There is minimal collateral support for this vessel, and its preservation is of paramount importance during clip ligation of posterior carotid wall aneurysms. The distal ends of the blades should not compromise the integrity of this vessel, which is often serpentine and hidden, draping over the AChA aneurysm dome.
大多数脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤首发症状表现为蝶鞍及脑池的SAH，很少发生脑实质内、脑室内出血及动眼神经功能障碍。	Most AChA aneurysms present with suprasellar and ambien cistern subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH.) They rarely present with intracerebral/intaventricular hemorrhage or oculomotor nerve dysfunction.
这一章中，笔者将描述如何夹闭脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤手术方法。	In this chapter, I will describe the operative techniques for clip ligation of AChA aneurysms.
后交通动脉瘤的处理方式与脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤相似，	The similar procedure for posterior communicating artery aneurysms is described in its own dedicated chapter.
笔者建议读者首先阅读后交通动脉瘤一章节后，再阅读本章内容。	I have abbreviated the relevant content here and encourage you to refer to the chapter on PCoA aneurysms before proceeding with the following discussion.
目前治疗选择有随访观察、介入栓塞、显微外科夹闭。	Modern treatment options for AChA aneurysms include observation, endovascular treatment, or microsurgical clip ligation.
患者年龄较大（＞75岁）或动脉瘤为未破裂小动脉瘤时，可以选择定期观察。	Observation is a reasonable option for small unruptured aneurysms or larger ones in older patients (75 years old).
患者基础情况较差也可以选择保守治疗。	Patients with underlying medical problems that affect their survival may also be treated conservatively.
如后交通动脉瘤一样，如果预期患者寿命较长，脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤比其它小的前循环动脉瘤更需积极的处理。	As with PCoA aneurysms, patients with significant life expectancy should be considered for more aggressive intervention than those with other small anterior circulation aneurysms.
评估后进行随访的动脉瘤如果在随访期间出现动脉瘤增大或动眼神经麻痹，需重新评估进行需要进行干预。	Aneurysms chosen for observation should be reconsidered for intervention if they increase in size or cause an oculomotor nerve palsy.
脉络膜前动脉经常从动脉瘤的瘤颈部位长出，	The AChA frequently emerges from the neck of the aneurysm.
动脉瘤颈的这种结构增加了血管内介入治疗的难度。	This neck configuration complicates endovascular therapy and places the small-caliber AChA at risk during coil deployment.
所以显微外科夹闭在治疗脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤中起到重要作用。	Thus, microsurgical clipping continues to play an important role in the management of AChA aneurysms that require relatively minimal microdissection or brain retraction.
如果CTA提示动脉瘤钙化，很可能因为血管壁的变厚僵硬而在显微夹闭后形成血管壁的塌陷进而累及脉络膜前动脉起始端及颈内动脉，所以处理此类动脉瘤的最好的方法为血管内介入治疗。	Calcified aneurysms, identified on CTA, are best managed via endovascular methods because clip ligation has a reasonable likelihood of compromising the origins of the AChA and the ICA by the thick collapsed walls of the parent vessels after clip deployment.
术前常规进行DSA或MRA/CTA影像学评估，CTA不仅可以提供良好的病变血管解剖结构，而且可以清楚显示病变周围颅底解剖，包括前床突、后床突的形态，动脉瘤颈的大小等，所以目前广泛应用于临床。	Initial radiologic evaluation of these aneurysms generally includes either a conventional catheter arteriography or CT/MR angiography. CT angiography (CTA) has become the mainstream initial study for evaluation because of the fine vascular detail it provides. Moreover, it shows the surrounding skull base anatomy, including the location of the anterior and posterior clinoid processes, with respect to the aneurysm neck.
CT骨窗可清楚显示中床突结构，对手术医生术中准备血管近端控制有重要意义。	Bone windowing of a CT scan can reveal the presence of a middle clinoid process, which is relevant when the surgeon is preparing for proximal control.
极少数动脉瘤指向于侧方的颞叶。	A rare subset of these aneurysms project laterally into the temporal lobe.
此种解剖变异提醒术者术中在近端血管完全控制之前，颞叶牵拉需谨慎。	This anatomic variation warns the operator against early temporal lobe retraction in the setting of a ruptured aneurysm until proximal control is reliably established.
图1. A型脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤起源于颈内动脉和脉络膜前动脉连接处（左图）。	Figure 1: A typical AChA aneurysm is shown originating from the junction of the ICA and AChA (left image).
位于颈内动脉后壁、后交通动脉起点远端的动脉瘤为脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤，较后交通动脉瘤更明显的外侧指向。	The aneurysm arising from the posterior carotid wall, just distal to the PCoA origin is considered an AChA aneurysm and is typically more laterally projecting than PCoA aneurysms.
显微夹闭术有效夹闭了动脉瘤同时保持脉络膜前动脉的通畅（右图）。	Clip ligation is effective for complete exclusion of the aneurysm while maintaining the patency of the AChA (right image).
术中神经生理监测的应用，包括体感诱发电位和运动诱发电位，可监测患者对血管临时阻断的耐受性并提示术者是否损伤穿支血管，特别有利于检测脉络膜前动脉及其中央支的运动系统血供情况。	Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring, including somatosensory and motor evoked potentials, can monitor the patient’s tolerance to temporary occlusion and warn the surgeon about potentially invisible compromise of the perforating vessels after clip ligation. This monitoring strategy is especially beneficial for the AChA artery and its associated perforating vessels that supply the motor system.
脉络膜前动脉起源于颈内动脉床突上段的后壁，较后交通动脉稍靠侧方，在手术操作之前，识别颈动脉后壁的所有血管非常重要。	The AChA arises slightly more laterally than the PCoA from the posterior wall of the supraclinoid ICA. Identification of both vessels at the posterior carotid wall is important before operative manipulation begins.
脉络膜前动脉可能有三支分支构成，沿大脑脚走行进入颞角的侧脑室内，并发出一些重要的穿支血管。	The AChA may consist of up to three branches. It courses through the crural cistern en route to its entry point into the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle, providing several critical perforators along its way.
脉络膜前动脉可分为脑池段和脉络丛段。	Therefore, the AChA is divided into cisternal and plexal segments.
脉络膜前动脉通常起源于后交通动脉远端，少数起源于更远的位置，可能在颈内动脉分叉处或M1段。	The AChA classically arises just distal to the PCoA, but it can occasionally arise more distally, either from the ICA bifurcation or the M1 segment.
有些甚至从后交通动脉发出。	It can even emerge from the PCoA itself.
后交通动脉和脉络膜前动脉的指向是从颈内动脉背侧指向的后内方，翼点入路的由前向后的手术视角，使得术者的视线无法直视这些血管走行。	Both the PCoA and AChA project posteriorly and medially from the dorsal aspect of the ICA. The anterior-to-posterior surgical view of the pterional approach places these vessels coursing away from the surgeon’s line of sight.
所有外科医生看到的只是走行到颈内动脉之前的血管最近端起始点。	All the surgeon sees is a knuckle of the very proximal artery at its origin before it becomes hidden behind the ICA.
图2. 如图显示非手术视角下后交通动脉（右侧剥离器所指）、穿支血管和脉络膜前动脉（亮红色所指）之间的关系。图中显示动眼神经。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr.授权）	Figure 2: A lateral nonoperative view across the posterior ICA demonstrates the anatomic relationships between the PCoA (mobilized with the right dissector,) its perforating vessels, and the AChA (in bright red.) The oculomotor nerve is visible (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
图3. 右侧经脑室-脉络膜入路显示脉络膜前动脉。	Figure 3: A view of the AChA (bright red) through the right transventricular transchoroidal approach is shown.
小脑幕边缘及动眼神经可作为解剖标志。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr.授权）	Note the edge of the tentorium and the oculomotor nerve for anatomic orientation (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
外侧膝状体侧方的后交通动脉和脉络膜前动脉的吻合不恒定，这也解释了脉络膜前动脉栓塞后导致的脑缺血范围大小不定。	There are inconsistent anastomoses between the PCoA and AChA along the lateral geniculate body. This finding explains the variability in the size of the ischemic territories caused by AChA occlusion.
显微外科夹闭脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤	MICROSURGICAL CLIP LIGATION OF ANTERIOR CHOROIDAL ARTERY ANEURYSMS
请参照颅脑手术入路一卷中扩大翼点入路部分，其过程适用于几乎所有脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤夹闭术。	Please refer to the Cranial Approaches volume for description of the extended pterional craniotomy that is suitable for almost all AChA aneurysms.
后外侧眼眶切开术应用于大动脉瘤的夹闭。	A posterolateral orbitotomy may be added for large aneurysms.
在这部分，将详细介绍翼点入路暴露颅内动脉瘤。	In this section, I elaborate on the specifics of the pterional approach as it pertains to the exposure of this aneurysm.
病人的体位要求，主要为不能让颞叶阻碍你观察、解剖动脉瘤的视线，并利用重力将额叶底面离开前颅底。	The main objectives of patient positioning are to prevent the temporal lobe from obstructing your dissection of the aneurysm while exploiting gravity to move the frontal lobe away from the anterior cranial fossa.
这要求将患者头伸直并向对侧旋转20°以扩大后额叶底面后方的手术视野。	These maneuvers expand the posteromedial subfrontal operative corridor and are accomplished by extending the patient’s head and limiting its rotation to 20 degrees.
蝶骨嵴必须磨掉直到到达上眶裂。	The sphenoid wing must be aggressively drilled until the superior orbital fissure is reached.
蝶骨嵴内侧尤为重要，因为它覆盖颈动脉池。	The most medial extent of the wing is the most important because it covers the carotid cistern.
如果蝶骨嵴没处理好，那么为了暴露脑池需要更大幅度的牵拉额叶。	If this last obstruction is not removed, substantially more frontal lobe elevation is needed to expose the cistern.
眶顶也需要磨平，这样可获得更好的手术视野。	The roof of the orbit is also drilled so that a flat operative trajectory over the orbit is available.
图4. 如图显示的是额叶底面后方手术入路暴露脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤（绿色箭头所指）。	Figure 4: Schematic representation of the posterior subfrontal operative pathway (green arrow) toward the AChA aneurysm.
此入路通过分离大脑外侧裂，直接暴露颈内动脉床突上段前外侧。	This pathway is possible via a proximal Sylvian fissure split, leading directly to the anterior and lateral aspects of the supraclinoid ICA.
暴露近端颈内动脉时尽量避免颞叶的牵拉，以防瘤体提前破裂。	Early exposure of the proximal ICA without temporal lobe retraction is necessary to avoid premature sac rupture.
硬膜内手术步骤	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
处理动脉瘤前需完成以下步骤：	There are three main goals that must be accomplished before the aneurysm can be directly handled.
分离侧裂，	The first goal is a proximal Sylvian fissure split.
拨开额叶，分离视交叉前蛛网膜。	The second goal is mobilization of the frontal lobe and dissection of its arachnoid bands over the chiasm and floor of the frontal fossa.
控制颈内动脉床突上段的近侧血管。	The third goal is establishing proximal control over the supraclinoid ICA.
只能通过牵拉额叶暴露动脉瘤，	The aneurysm must be exposed solely via frontal lobe retraction.
暴露的关键在于开放额叶底面后方的空间，这样可安全的暴露动脉瘤而不会使动脉瘤受到牵拉破裂。	The crux of the initial exposure is freeing up the posterior subfrontal lobe so that it can be safely and gently mobilized without any transmission of force to the aneurysm dome.
图5. 沿着骨瓣边缘剪开硬脑膜，向下翻至眶顶，可以磨平蝶骨脊。	Figure 5: The initial intradural exposure is illustrated. Adequate sphenoid wing removal is evident when the dura can be mobilized flat over the orbital roof and along the anterior edge of the craniotomy.
图6. 图为左颈内动脉前外侧壁，动脉瘤体前方几毫米处为后交通动脉起点。	Figure 6: The posterolateral wall of the left carotid artery is exposed. The origin of the PCoA is apparent only as a small knuckle a few millimeters inferior to the aneurysm sac.
在接下来的瘤颈暴露的过程中，特别是对破裂动脉瘤，暂时性的颈内动脉夹闭是必须的。	Temporary clipping of the ICA is often necessary, especially for ruptured aneurysms, during the next steps of neck dissection.
当额叶已经完全牵开，近端血管已经控制好，接下来重点是瘤颈的解剖暴露，这是手术的关键部分。	With the brain relaxed, the frontal lobe completely released, and proximal control secured, the focus of dissection can now shift toward the circumdissection of the neck, the most critical part of the operation.
夹闭动脉瘤是一个直接的操作，	Application of the clip is a relatively straightforward affair.
但是为瘤夹的叶片游离出充足的空间是一个挑战，放夹前的分离解剖考验术者的外科智慧，需要术者参考术前影像资料进行三维解剖的认识。	The creation of space for the clip blades is the challenge, and preclipping dissection requires surgical intellect and appreciation of three-dimensional (3D) anatomy based on a detailed study of preoperative images.
解剖动脉瘤	Aneurysm Dissection
动脉瘤囊和脉络膜前动脉走行背离术者，	The aneurysm sac and AChA travel away from the operator.
所以术者只能看到脉络膜前动脉起始部的转折。	As a result, only a small knuckle, representing the origin of the AChA, is visible.
笔者主张在关键步骤时使用颈内动脉近端临时夹闭。	I prefer to use brief periods of temporary proximal ICA occlusion;
如果willis环的侧支循环良好，笔者不认为使用依托咪脂造成暴发抑制是必须的。	I do not believe etomidate burst suppression is necessary during temporary proximal ICA occlusion if collateral support is robust via a functional circle of Willis.
动脉瘤的减张对于瘤颈解剖这些高危操作有重要作用。	The loss of turgor in the aneurysm remarkably facilitates its neck dissection during high-risk maneuvers.
瘤颈的分离需要在脉络膜前动脉起始部和近端瘤颈之间以及沿着颈内动脉外侧面向远端进行。	The neck dissection proceeds between this knuckle and the proximal neck of the aneurysm and proceeds distally along the lateral aspect of the ICA.
虽然此操作让人感到紧张、压抑，但在高倍视野下的锐性剥离总是可以在脉络膜前动脉和动脉瘤颈之间找到一个平面。	Although this maneuver can be tedious, sharp dissection under high magnification will almost always find a plane between the AChA and the aneurysm neck.
只要暴露几毫米瘤颈就足够放置动脉瘤夹就可以了，	Only a few millimeters of the aneurysm neck is isolated, just enough to place a clip blade.
没有必要暴露更多的动脉和血管。	There is no need to dissect more of the artery or dissect out onto the aneurysm dome.
如果脉络膜前动脉不易辨别，可轻微向内侧牵拉颈内动脉，这样可帮助术者识别动脉瘤颈远端的动脉起始点。	If the AChA cannot be readily identified, the ICA can be gently retracted medially to allow the surgeon to explore the origin of the artery more distally along the neck.
图7. 远端瘤颈在颈内动脉和动脉瘤之间，类似的显微外科手术原则同样适用于在此的操作。	Figure 7: The distal neck is the space between the ICA and the aneurysm; similar microsurgical principles mentioned above apply to this space as well.
脉络膜前动脉有时候和动脉瘤基底或体部粘连在一起，	The AChA is sometimes adherent to the midbody or fundus of the aneurysm.
近端颈内动脉临时夹闭可降低动脉瘤的张力，降低脉络膜前动脉和动脉瘤颈分离时的手术风险。	Temporary proximal ICA clipping is especially beneficial to soften the aneurysm, allowing dissection of the AChA away from the neck without placing the AChA at risk.
只要瘤颈远、近端分离出来，并且能清楚的辨别后交通动脉及脉络膜前动脉，就可以放心的夹闭动脉瘤。	Once the proximal and distal necks have been dissected and the courses of the PCoA and AChA identified, definitive clipping of the aneurysm can commence.
颈内动脉近端临时夹闭后，术者可以轻轻推移远近端的瘤颈，解剖游离不在术者视线范围内的瘤颈，确保可以看到动脉瘤颈部向内侧的转折。	With temporary ICA occlusion in place, I mobilize the proximal and distal neck and dissect the portion of the neck that is turning away from my line of sight, ensuring that I can see where the neck is turning around to form its medial border with respect to wall of the ICA.
此操作非常重要，充分了解瘤颈的3维解剖可避免动脉瘤夹闭角度过度偏离颈内动脉轴线的错误，造成动脉瘤夹闭不完全或术中动脉瘤破裂。	This maneuver is imperative because a lack of understanding of the 3D neck anatomy will lead the operator to apply the clip at a wrong angle away from the ICA axis, partially clipping the neck and precipitating an intraoperative rupture.
盲目解剖、凭猜测动脉瘤颈界限进行夹闭可造成灾难性的后果，这些操作发生在那些迫使自己控制情绪的紧张神经外科医生的手术过程中。	Completing dissection blindly using the clip blades and “guessing at the deeper aneurysm neck borders” are recipes for disaster. These novice maneuvers are a result of a nervous surgeon who is allowing his or her emotions to control microsurgery.
在夹闭破裂动脉瘤时，在动脉瘤完全控制前，都不能动瘤体周围蛛网膜下腔中的血肿。	In ruptured aneurysm cases, the subarachnoid clot around the dome is left undisturbed until the aneurysm is secured.
需沿着颈内动脉床突上段部分的后外侧和瘤颈进行解剖，不能在动脉瘤顶周围解剖，也不能做穿刺瘤体、显露瘤顶的操作。	The dissection should be limited along the posterolateral wall of the supraclinoid ICA and the neck; the operator should not wander and unintentionally puncture or uncover the aneurysm dome.
解剖步骤需有条不紊的从近端至远端，暴露后交通动脉起始点、近端瘤颈和脉络膜前动脉起点、瘤体、远端瘤颈和可能夹闭的远端脉络膜前动脉。	The sequence of dissection should proceed methodically from proximal to distal, revealing the knuckle of the PCoA origin, the proximal neck and AChA origin, the sac itself, the distal neck and then the distal section of the AChA away from the pathway of the clip blades.
最后释放动脉瘤夹。	Next, the clip is deployed.
夹闭动脉瘤	Clip Application
大多数脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤瘤体较小、瘤颈较窄，	Most AChA aneurysms are small and have relatively narrow necks.
术者会用一个简单的折刀样（枪状）直夹、沿着与颈内动脉垂直的方向，夹子尖朝向侧方夹闭动脉瘤。	I ligate these aneurysms with a bayoneted simple straight clip, angled perpendicular to the ICA axis with the tips pointing laterally.
虽然折叠效应可能导致颈内动脉管腔的狭窄，但这较少发生在瘤颈狭窄的患者中。	Although an accordion effect can potentially cause stenosis of the ICA lumen, this is less of a concern if the aneurysm has a narrow neck.
图8. 临时夹闭颈内动脉可帮助分离解剖动脉瘤。	Figure 8: The aneurysm can be best manipulated and dissected under brief periods of temporary ICA occlusion.
夹闭动脉瘤时注意不要夹闭脉络膜前动脉起始端。	Clip application follows; the origin of the AChA should not be compromised.
就算有小的瘤颈残留也要保证脉络膜前动脉起始点血管的通畅。	Invariably, a small neck remnant is necessary to preserve the AChA’s origin.
枪状直夹可让术者直视下看到瘤夹周围的组织，避免夹闭脉络膜前。	Bayoneted clips are ideal for allowing me to visualize the origin of the AChA around the bulk of the clip appliers.
下图显示了脉络膜前动脉的其中一支穿支血管（箭头所示）。	The lower photo demonstrates one of the perforating branches of the AChA (arrow) just distal to the blades.
图9. 动脉瘤夹闭后用术中荧光血管造影检查脉络膜前动脉（红色箭头）是否通畅。	Figure 9:  The clip was deployed and the AChA (red arrows) at the tip of the blades was inspected for its patency via intraoperative fluorescence angiogram.
在动脉瘤夹包绕瘤颈逐渐夹闭的过程中，时刻需注意叶片的尖端，确保不要干扰到脉络膜前动脉。	As the clip blades are gradually closed, attention is focused on the tips of the blades to ensure that they are free of the AChA as it turns around the dome.
图10. 当动脉瘤夹准备夹闭动脉瘤时，轻轻的旋转夹子确保夹子不会夹闭脉络膜前动脉。	Figure 10: Once the clip is placed, I gently rotate the blades to ensure that the blades are not compromising any segment of the AChA.
这种检查有助于降低缺血性并发症的发生率，必要时动脉瘤夹可重新定位。	This inspection is crucial for avoiding complications; clip repositioning may be necessary.
上图箭头所指的是动脉瘤夹闭前的脉络膜前动脉起始点，下图箭头所指的为动脉瘤周围血管的远端。	The arrow on the upper photo points at the origin of the AChA before clip deployment, while the arrow in the lower intraoperative photo points at the more distal route of the vessel around the aneurysm.
荧光血管造影对评估脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤有无完全夹闭有一定的局限性，	Fluorescence videoangiogram has some limitations for evaluation of AChA aneurysms after their ligation.
由于动脉瘤位置较深，瘤体隐藏在颈内动脉后方，足够的激发光难以达到瘤体内部的荧光剂，	Most often, because of the deep operative corridor and the hidden aneurysm, enough excitation light cannot reach the fluorescent agent within the sac for adequate emission signals.
这可能造成假阴性。	This phenomenon leads to false negative results.
所以瘤体穿刺或术中血管造影对评估动脉瘤有无完全闭塞是必须的。	Therefore, puncture of the dome or intraoperative catheter angiogram is necessary for confirmation of aneurysm exclusion.
其他注意事项和动脉瘤变异	Additional Considerations and Aneurysm Variations
笔者喜欢用简单的枪状直夹，	I prefer to use a simple bayonetted straight clip.
对于一些向后突出的脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤，如果直夹不适合，笔者会选择可以包住颈内动脉的带窗直角夹。	If this is not anatomically feasible, as in the case of a posteriorly-projecting AChA aneurysms, I use an angled fenestrated clip, encasing the ICA.
此种结构可避免“狗耳朵”的发生，且可有效的避免管径的折叠。	This construct avoids “dog ears” and is most effective for collapsing the neck.
此外，不易发生迟发性瘤夹移位。	Furthermore, delayed clip displacement is unlikely.
图11. 应用带窗直夹夹闭向后指向的脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤，	Figure 11: I clip posteriorly-projecting AChA aneurysms using an angled fenestrated clip.
夹窗包绕颈内动脉。	The fenestration encircles the ICA.
脉络膜前动脉位于瘤夹叶片后根部的远端，接近颈内动脉分叉处。	The AChA is seen just distal to the heel of the clip, proximal to the ICA bifurcation.
对于瘤体与脉络膜前动脉粘连的病人中，这样空间位置的夹闭可避免常规分离脉络膜前动脉。	This construct does not routinely require isolation of the AChA in case of its attachment to the dome.
图12. 上图为向右侧后方突出的脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤的空间结构。	Figure 12: The upper intraoperative photos demonstrate the configuration of a right-sided posteriorly projecting AChA aneurysm.
球头剥离子头端所指的为脉络膜前动脉起点（上图）。	The tip of the ball-tipped dissector points at the origin of the AChA (upper image).
中间图显示为带窗直夹夹闭向后指向的动脉瘤，避免了对脉络膜前动脉过度的分离动作。	The angled fenestrated clip was effective while obviating the need for significant manipulation of the AChA (middle image).
术中荧光造影显示脉络膜前动脉（箭头）通畅、动脉瘤已经闭塞。	Intraoperative fluorescence angiography demonstrated patency of the AChA (arrow) and exclusion of the aneurysm.
图13. 如图为梭形脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤手术示意图，无明显的瘤颈。	Figure 13: An operative view of a fusiform AChA aneurysm without a definable neck is demonstrated.
这种动脉瘤不适合夹闭，	This aneurysm is not amenable to clip ligation.
最好的方法可能是棉布包裹动脉瘤，	Wrapping the aneurysm with muslin is the most reasonable strategy in this case.
不能为了夹闭动脉瘤而牺牲脉络膜前动脉。	The AChA should not be sacrificed.
不小心牺牲脉络膜前动脉会导致术后发生脉络膜前动脉综合征，表现为对侧偏瘫、偏侧感觉障碍、偏盲，往往是牺牲了脉络膜前动脉和后交通动脉发出的穿支动脉所致，后果严重，应尽可能避免。	Inadvertent sacrifice of the AChA leads to an anterior choroidal syndrome that consists of contralateral hemiplegia, hemianesthesia, and hemianopsia. This syndrome is very disabling and nearly always the result of trapping the AChA or perforators arising from the PCoA and AChA. Every effort should be made to avoid this unfortunate outcome.
术后给予标准治疗，建议应用抗痉挛药，1周后逐渐减量。	Standard postoperative care is used. Anticonvulsants are recommended and tapered off about one week after surgery.
· 脉络膜前动脉的起点通常被误认为动脉瘤的近端瘤颈，解剖时需仔细辨别，避免夹闭脉络膜前动脉。	The takeoff of the AChA can be mistaken for the proximal neck of the aneurysm. This anatomy must be carefully dissected to avoid occlusion of the AChA during aneurysm clipping.
· 脉络膜前动脉的近端常常粘附在动脉瘤体上面，解剖时需格外小心，动脉瘤夹闭时尽量避免夹闭脉络膜前动脉。	The proximal segment of the AChA typically drapes over the aneurysm sac. Careful microdissection is necessary to save the AChA during clip deployment.
后交通动脉瘤	Posterior Communicating Artery Aneurysm
图1：动脉瘤手术的先驱者Walter Dandy演示如何暴露和控制术中动脉瘤破裂，并跨过后交通动脉瘤瘤颈放置银夹，随后切除动脉瘤。	Figure 1: Walter Dandy, a pioneer in aneurysm surgery, demonstrated how to expose and control intraoperative aneurysm rupture and place a silver clip across the neck of a posterior communicating artery aneurysm. The aneurysm was subsequently resected.
颈内动脉(ICA) 后壁起源的动脉瘤是最常见的颅内动脉瘤(约占所有动脉瘤的35%) 。它包括起源于脉络膜前动脉(AChA)和后交通动脉(PCoA)的动脉瘤。	Aneurysms of the posterior wall of the internal carotid artery (ICA,) originating from the anterior choroidal artery (AChA) and posterior communicating artery (PCoA,) are the most common intracranial aneurysms (up to 35% of all aneurysms.)
PCoA动脉瘤大约占所有破裂动脉瘤的四分之一。	PCoA aneurysms represent roughly one-quarter of all ruptured aneurysms.
除蛛网膜下腔出血外，PCoA动脉瘤常有占位效应，压迫动眼神经；偶尔也可表现为栓塞现象。	In addition to subarachnoid hemorrhage, patients with PCoA aneurysms commonly present with mass effect on the oculomotor nerve or, less commonly, with embolic phenomena.
除非有证据证明有其他病因，否则无痛、自发性的动眼神经麻痹应首先考虑PCoA动脉瘤。	A spontaneous painless third nerve palsy is assumed to be caused by a PCoA aneurysm until proven otherwise.
PCoA动脉瘤也可表现为沿小脑幕及凸面分布的自发性硬膜下血肿。	A spontaneous subdural hematoma along the tentorium and reaching the convexity can also be caused by a PCoA aneurysm.
这种血肿占位效应很明显，可引起脑疝症状，需紧急手术清除。	Such a hematoma often causes symptomatic mass effect with impending brain herniation and requires emergent evacuation.
在这章中，笔者将描述PCoA动脉瘤夹闭的手术技术。	In this chapter, I will describe the operative techniques for clip ligation of PCoA aneurysms.
与之类似的脉络膜前动脉动脉瘤夹闭的手术技巧描述详见其专门章节：脉络膜前动脉瘤手术要点（Anterior Choroidal Artery Aneurysm）。	The similar procedure for anterior choroidal artery aneurysms is described in its own dedicated chapter.
PCoA动脉瘤的现代治疗方法包括观察随访、血管内介入治疗，或显微外科夹闭。	Modern treatment options for PCoA aneurysms include observation, endovascular treatment, or microsurgical clip ligation.
如果动脉瘤很小且未破裂、或动脉瘤稍大但患者高龄（75岁），抑或患者存在其他有可能影响生命的病症（如心肺功能疾病、恶性肿瘤等，译者注），观察随访是一个合理的选择。	Observation is a reasonable option for small unruptured aneurysms or larger ones in older patients (75 years old) or patients with underlying medical conditions that affect their survival.
对未破裂PCoA动脉瘤，作出“观察随访”的决定时应当反复考量。	Observation for unruptured PCoA aneurysms is an actuarial decision.
第二项国际未破裂颅内动脉瘤研究（ISUIA2）将PCoA动脉瘤与后循环动脉瘤一起归入破裂高危组，小于7mm的动脉瘤5年破裂风险约2.5%，瘤体体积扩大时，破裂风险亦显著增加。	The Second International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms (ISUIA 2) grouped PCoA aneurysms with posterior circulation aneurysms in the group with higher risk of rupture, citing a 2.5% rupture risk over 5 years for those smaller than 7 mm and a rapidly increasing risk for larger lesions.
然而，也有学者批驳这项研究的结论，认为PcoA动脉瘤的破裂风险与前循环的小动脉瘤类似，可以安全观察随访。	However, some have criticized this study and argue that the rupture risk is more in line with those of other small anterior circulation aneurysms that can be observed safely.
因此，如果患者预期生存期很长，对于PcoA动脉瘤应当选择更积极的干预方式，而非像小型前循环动脉瘤那样保守观察。	Thus, patients with significant life expectancy should be considered for intervention more aggressively than those with other small anterior circulation aneurysms.
选择观察的PcoA动脉瘤，如果体积增大或导致动眼神经麻痹，应考虑其他方式治疗。	Aneurysms chosen for observation should be reconsidered for intervention if they increase in size or cause an oculomotor nerve palsy.
PCoA动脉瘤通常既可以显微外科夹闭，也可以血管内介入治疗。	PCoA aneurysms are often amenable to both microsurgical and endovascular treatment modalities.
具体来说，PcoA动脉瘤是属于最适合夹闭的类型之一，术中需要的显微分离和大脑牵拉都很少。	Specifically, PCoA aneurysms are among those most readily amenable to clip ligation, requiring minimal microdissection and brain retraction during surgery.
对年轻患者（ 50岁），血管解剖差无法介入治疗的患者，或存在胚胎型大脑后动脉（PCA）的患者，笔者推荐显微外科夹闭。	I generally recommend microsurgical clip ligation for patients who are younger (50 years old,) for those few patients who have poor vascular anatomy for endovascular treatment, and for those with a fetal posterior cerebral artery (PCA).
此外，如果动脉瘤主要起源于PCoA本身或与引起了动眼神经麻痹，笔者也建议显微外科夹闭。	In addition, I recommend microsurgical clip ligation if the aneurysm primarily arises from the PCoA itself or is associated with an oculomotor nerve palsy.
两种治疗方式均可缓解动眼神经麻痹；但显微外科夹闭比血管内介入的恢复率可能略高。	Oculomotor nerve palsies tend to resolve after either modality; recovery rates may be slightly higher after clipping than coiling.
对于巨大型动脉瘤，夹闭后瘤内减压能够有效地缓解局部占位效应。	For giant aneurysms, local mass effect is effectively relieved through aneurysm decompression after clipping.
与显微手术相比，老年患者更容易耐受血管内治疗，栓塞后残余动脉瘤的出血风险目前尚不清楚，但可能性较小。	Older patients tolerate endovascular treatment more readily than microsurgery and the hemorrhagic risks of aneurysm remnants after embolization are unknown but most likely small.
在CT血管造影（CTA）上识别的钙化型动脉瘤最好通过血管内介入方法治疗，因为动脉瘤夹放置后瘤壁塌陷，钙化的厚壁可能压迫到PCoA起始部和颈内动脉。	Calcified aneurysms, identified on computed tomography angiography (CTA,) are best managed via endovascular methods because clip ligation has a reasonable likelihood of compromising the origins of the PCoA and the ICA by the thick collapsed walls of the parent vessels after clip deployment.
动脉瘤术前的初步影像学评价通常包括常规导管动脉造影（DSA）或计算机断层扫描（CTA）/磁共振血管造影（MRA）。	Initial radiologic evaluation of these aneurysms generally includes either a conventional catheter arteriography or a computed tomography/magnetic resonance angiography.
CTA能很好的提供细微血管的细节，已经成为主流的首选检查方式。	CTA has become the mainstream initial study for evaluation because it provides fine vascular detail.
不仅如此，它还能显示颅底周围解剖，包括与动脉瘤颈有关的前和后床突位置。	Moreover, it shows the surrounding skull base anatomy, including the location of the anterior and posterior clinoid processes with respect to the neck of the aneurysm.
CT扫描的骨窗扫描片上有时可以发现中床突，这一结构在术者准备进行近端控制时可能影响操作。	Bone windowing of a CT scan can reveal the presence of a middle clinoid process, which is relevant when the surgeon is preparing for proximal control.
PcoA动脉瘤中有一类亚型指向外侧凸入颞叶，而不是向下凸入或低于幕缘。	A subset of these aneurysms project laterally into the temporal lobe, rather than into or below the tentorial edge.
这种解剖变异警告术者在破裂动脉瘤患者手术早期，建立可靠的近端控制前，应避免颞叶牵拉。	This anatomic variation warns the operator against early temporal lobe retraction in patients with a ruptured aneurysm until proximal control is reliably established.
若存在胚胎PCA，则要求术者在夹闭过程中切实保护好PCoA。	The presence of a fetal PCA clearly demands preservation of the PCoA during clip application.
罕见情况下，PCoA动脉瘤主要起源于PCoA本身而非起源于颈内动脉，这类动脉瘤需要选择特殊夹闭策略。	Rare PCoA aneurysms arise primarily from the PCoA rather than the ICA and require alternative clipping strategies.
如果手术需要且在影像上证明大脑后动脉P1段充盈良好，可以牺牲细小的PCoA。	Small PCoAs may be sacrificed with impunity if necessary and if a prominent P1 is evident on imaging.
图2：显示起源于颈内动脉（ICA）和PCoA交界处的一个典型PCoA动脉瘤（左上图）。动脉瘤可能偶尔主要源于PCoA（右上图）。大型PCoA动脉瘤可以将ICA融入到他们的瘤颈内（下图）。	Figure 2: A typical PCoA aneurysm is shown originating from the junction of the ICA and PCoA (left upper image.) The aneurysm may occasionally arise primarily from the PCoA (right upper image.) Large PCoA aneurysms can incorporate the ICA into their neck (lower image.)
术中神经生理监测，包括体感和运动诱发电位，可以监视临时阻断时病人的耐受性并提醒术者未被发现的穿支血管损害情况。	Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring, including somatosensory and motor evoked potentials, can monitor the tolerance of the patient to temporary occlusion and warn the surgeon regarding an undetected compromise of perforating vessels after clip ligation.
PCoA起源于床突上ICA的后壁。	The PCoA arises from the posterior wall of the supraclinoid ICA.
在其分叉处，PCoA在近端ICA’s眼动脉段和其远端交通段之间提供了一个自然分界。	At its branch point, the PCoA provides a natural demarcation between the proximal ICA’s ophthalmic segment and its distal communicating segment.
交通段后壁发出AChA，一支在PCoA手术中需要识别和保护的重要动脉。	The posterior wall of the communicating segment gives rise to the AChA, a key artery to identify and preserve during PCoA surgery.
PCoA指向后内侧，连接前（颈内动脉）和后（基底动脉）循环。	The PCoA projects posteriorly and medially to bridge the anterior (ICA) and posterior (basilar artery) circulations.
PCoA与大脑后动脉（PCA）相接，将PCA分为P1和P2段，PcoA在走行中还发出几支重要的丘脑穿通动脉。	The PCoA connects to the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), demarcating the junction of the P1 and P2 segments of the PCA, and it gives off several vital thalamoperforators along its course.
图3：显示右侧翼点入路显露ICA末端。	Figure 3: A right-sided pterional exposure of the ICA terminus is shown.
外侧裂已经充分解剖。	The Sylvian fissure has been widely split.
PCoA在ICA后方发出并走行向后内侧方。	The PCoA is seen departing and traveling behind the ICA posteriorly and medially.
隐隐可见PCoA发出段的“凸起”是明显的。	The barely visible “knuckle” of the PCoA takeoff is apparent.
注意ICA-PCoA交界处和动眼神经的关系。	Note the relationship between the ICA-PCoA junction and the oculomotor nerve.
AChA隐藏在ICA背面（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr.授权）。	The AChA is hidden behind the wall of the ICA (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4：显示右颞下视角观察ICA外侧。	Figure 4: A right subtemporal view of the lateral ICA is shown.
注意PCoA与AChA起始部之间的关系（白色箭头），ICA-PCoA交界处与动眼神经的解剖关系被再次标注。	Note the relationship of the PCoA to the AChA takeoff (white arrow.) The anatomic location of the ICA-PCoA junction in relation to the oculomotor nerve is again indicated.
沿PCoA行程可见几支丘脑穿通动脉（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr.授权）。	Several thalamoperforating arteries along the course of the PCoA are shown (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
PCoA两个重要的解剖变异值得进一步讨论：胚胎型大脑后动脉（PCA）和漏斗型PCoA。	Two important anatomic variants of the PCoA are worth further discussion: the fetal posterior cerebral artery (PCA) and the PCoA infundibulum.
胚胎型PCA是一种发育变异，见于20-30%的患者。	A fetal PCA is a developmental variant found in 20-30% of patients.
因PCA从PCoA向基底动脉移行时发育不全，导致粗大的PCoA大部分或完全供应PCA分布区。	It occurs when the PCA fails to transition from the PCoA to the basilar artery for its main supply, resulting in a large PCoA that preferentially or entirely supplies the PCA distribution.
这类病人必须特别注意，因为PCoA起始部的冲击可引起枕叶缺血，下面将详细讨论。	Special care must be taken in this patient population because impingement of the PCoA origin can cause occipital lobe ischemia; this is discussed below.
这种变异增加了PCoA动脉瘤形成和破裂的概率。	This variant is associated with an increased rate of PCoA aneurysm formation and rupture.
漏斗型PCoA可见于10%的患者，表现为动脉起始部增宽，漏斗样降至正常大小血管。	The PCoA infundibulum occurs in 10% of patients and presents as a widened origin of the artery that funnels down to a normal size vessel.
本质上不是病变，不应被误认为是PCoA动脉瘤。	This is not a pathologic entity and should not be mistaken for a PCoA aneurysm.
PCoA动脉瘤可起源于床突上ICA，靠近PCoA起始部远端（交界部动脉瘤，最常见）或直接起源于PCoA本身（真性PCoA动脉瘤）（参见图2）。	PCoA aneurysms refer to aneurysms of the supraclinoid ICA situated just distal to the takeoff of the PCoA (junctional aneurysm, most common) or directly arising from the PCoA itself (true PCoA aneurysm)(see Figure 2).
大多数PCoA动脉瘤位于PCoA和AChA之间的ICA，融合了两支血管的起始部。	Most PCoA aneurysms are based on the ICA between the PCoA and the AChA, incorporating part of the origin of both former vessels.
PCoA离开ICA后壁后，走行在后内侧，穿过Lilieguist膜，汇入PCA。	After leaving the posterior wall of the ICA, the PCoA courses posteriorly and medially before piercing the membrane of Liliequist en route to joining the PCA.
与PCoA动脉瘤密切相关的是AChA。	Intimately related to PCoA aneurysms is the AChA.
一支很小，但至关重要的末梢动脉。	A small vessel, but vital end artery that usually arises from the supraclinoid ICA, the AChA may consist of up to three branches.
AChA通常发自床突上ICA，可能由三个以上分支组成，其走行通过脚池，直至进入侧脑室颞角，途中发出若干支关键穿通动脉。	It courses through the crural cistern en route to its entry point into the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle, providing several critical perforators along its way.
AChA通常紧贴PCoA动脉瘤远端发出，偶尔也会在更远端发出，甚至发自ICA分叉部或M1段。	AChA classically arises just distal to PCoA aneurysms, but can occasionally arise more distally, either from the ICA bifurcation or the M1 segment.
还可能与PCoA融合。	Occasionally it even emerges from the PCoA itself.
PCoA和AChA均从ICA背侧发出，指向后内方。	Both PCoA and AChA project posteriorly and medially from the dorsal aspect of the ICA.
当翼点入路手术从前向后观察时，这些血管向远离术者视线方向走行。	The anterior-to-posterior surgical view of the pterional approach places these vessels coursing away from the surgeon’s line of sight.
术者仅能观察到在离PCoA起始部很近的地方一动脉凸起，此后PCoA即隐藏在ICA背侧走行。	All the operator sees is a knuckle of the very proximal artery at its origin before it becomes hidden behind the ICA.
图5：ICA后部，外侧观显示PCoA（用右侧剥离子移动）、它的穿支血管与AChA（鲜红色）之间解剖关系。图中可见动眼神经（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr. 授权）。	Figure 5: A lateral view across the posterior ICA demonstrates the anatomic relationships between the PCoA (mobilized with the right dissector,) its perforating vessels, and the AChA (in bright red.) The oculomotor nerve is visible (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
大多数PCoA动脉瘤指向下方、后方和侧方。	Most PCoA aneurysms project inferiorly, posteriorly, and laterally.
指向侧方的动脉瘤与幕缘和颞叶联系紧密，因此，即使颞叶的轻微操作也容易造成动脉瘤破裂。	Lateral-projecting aneurysms are intimately associated with the tentorial edge and temporal lobe and are therefore prone to rupture with even minimal manipulation of the temporal lobe.
更多向下指向的动脉瘤与动眼神经接触；但他们也靠近后床突，可能会干扰动脉瘤夹的放置。	More inferior-projecting aneurysms are in contact with the oculomotor nerve; however, they are also close to the posterior clinoid process that can interfere with placement of the clip blades.
PCoA和动眼神经走行在紧邻的平行层面内，因此一个扩大向下突出的PCoA动脉瘤可以压迫神经。	The PCoA and the oculomotor nerve run within closely related parallel planes, and therefore an enlarging inferior-projecting PCoA aneurysm can infringe on the nerve.
动眼神经包含外周副交感神经纤维支配瞳孔缩小，以及中枢运动纤维支配内侧腹直肌、上直肌、下直肌和下斜肌，以及眼睑提肌。	The oculomotor nerve contains peripherally-positioned parasympathetic nerve fibers supplying pupillary constrictors, as well as centrally-positioned motor fibers supplying the medial rectus, superior rectus, inferior rectus, and inferior oblique muscles, along with the levator palpebrae superioris.
因此，大型PCoA动脉瘤会导致瞳孔散大和上睑下垂，表现眼球位于外下位或“落魄”眼。	As a result, an enlarging PCoA aneurysm will cause a blown pupil and ptosis followed by laterally and inferiorly pointed or “down and out” eye.
后交通动脉瘤的显微外科夹闭	MICROSURGICAL CLIP LIGATION OF POSTERIOR COMMUNICATING ARTERY ANEURYSMS
请参阅开颅入路卷扩大翼点入路（pterional craniotomy）的描述，它适用于几乎所有PCoA动脉瘤。	Please refer to the Cranial Approaches volume for description of the extended pterional craniotomy that is suitable for almost all PCoA aneurysms.
巨大动脉瘤可去除眶后外侧壁获得良好的显露。	A posterolateral orbitotomy can be added for giant aneurysms.
在这一章中，笔者将详细说明利用翼点入路暴露PCoA动脉瘤的技巧与要点。	In this chapter, I elaborate on the specifics of the pterional approach as it pertains to the exposure of PCoA aneurysms.
病人体位的主要目标是避免颞叶阻挡动脉瘤分离操作，同时利用重力移动额叶离开前颅窝。	The main objectives of patient positioning are to prevent the temporal lobe from obstructing dissection of the aneurysm while exploiting gravity to move the frontal lobe away from the anterior cranial fossa.
这些目标可通过头部稍伸展和向对侧旋转20度完成，这样的头位可扩大额下后内侧手术通道。	These maneuvers expand the posteromedial subfrontal operative corridor and are accomplished by slight head extension and limiting head rotation to 20 degrees.
必须积极地磨除蝶骨嵴直到眶上裂。	The sphenoid wing must be aggressively drilled until the superior orbital fissure is reached.
磨除蝶骨嵴最内侧是最重要的，因为它覆盖了颈动脉池。	Osteotomy of the most medial extent of the wing is the most important because it covers the carotid cistern.
如果最后的骨性部分不去除，就需要更多的抬起额叶才能暴露颈动脉池。	If this last obstruction is not removed, substantially more frontal lobe elevation is needed to expose the cistern.
眶顶也要磨平，使术者获得与眶顶平行的手术角度。	The roof of the orbit is also drilled so that a flat operative trajectory over the orbit is available.
图6：表示朝向PCoA动脉瘤的额后下手术通路（绿色箭头）示意图。	Figure 6: Schematic representation of the posterior subfrontal operative pathway (green arrow) toward the PCoA aneurysm is illustrated.
通过分离外侧裂近端，可直接显露床突上ICA前外侧面。	This pathway is possible via a proximal Sylvian fissure split, leading directly to the anterior and lateral aspects of the supraclinoid ICA.
为避免动脉瘤破裂，应在无颞叶牵拉的情况下早期暴露ICA近端。	Early exposure of the proximal ICA without temporal lobe retraction is necessary to avoid premature sac rupture.
硬膜内操作技巧	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
初步显露	Initial Exposure
在直接处理动脉瘤前有三个主要目标必须完成。	There are three main goals that must be accomplished before the aneurysm can be directly handled.
第一个目标是分离外侧裂近端。	The first goal is a proximal Sylvian fissure split.
第二个目标是移动额叶，分离附着在视交叉和前颅窝底的蛛网膜小梁。	The second goal is mobilization of the frontal lobe and dissection of its arachnoidal attachments over the chiasm and floor of the frontal fossa.
第三个目标是建立床突上ICA的近端控制。	The third goal is establishing proximal control over the supraclinoid ICA.
显露动脉瘤必须只能通过牵拉额叶。	The aneurysm must be exposed solely via frontal lobe retraction.
初步显露的关键是松解额后下叶，使其可以安全地轻轻移动，而没有任何力传到经常附着于颞叶的动脉瘤顶。	The crux of the initial exposure is freeing up the posterior subfrontal lobe so that it can be safely and gently mobilized without any transmission of force to the aneurysm dome that is frequently adherent to the temporal lobe.
图7：图示硬膜内的初步显露。	Figure 7: Initial intradural exposure is illustrated.
当硬脑膜翻起时能够平眶顶和骨窗前缘，说明蝶骨嵴已经充分磨除。	Adequate sphenoid wing removal is evident when the dura can be mobilized flat over the orbital roof and along the anterior edge of the craniotomy.
沿嗅束外侧将额叶轻轻抬起，给外侧裂前缘的蛛网膜带施加张力。	Initial gentle elevation of the frontal lobe just lateral to the olfactory tract places the arachnoid bands over the anterior limb of the Sylvian fissure on stretch.
随后术者既可以打开视神经颈动脉池以松解额叶，也可以分离外侧裂水平部。	The surgeon’s attention then turns to either opening the opticocarotid cistern and freeing up the frontal lobe or opening the horizontal part of the Sylvian fissure.
调整手术显微镜的视角，使物镜看起来略后，垂直于大脑外侧裂水平段。	The angle of view for the operating microscope is adjusted so the camera looks slightly posterior, perpendicular to the horizontal segment of the Sylvian fissure.
对于PCoA动脉瘤，不必要将外侧裂广泛解剖，通常只需要将前部做局限性分离（开放蝶骨嵴段）就足够了。	A generous fissure split is unnecessary for PCoA aneurysms, and only a conservative anterior split (opening the sphenoidal segment) is often adequate.
图8：轻柔抬起额叶，释放脑脊液，可见覆盖大脑外侧裂近端增厚的蛛网膜层。	Figure 8: Gentle elevation of the frontal lobe permits cerebrospinal fluid egress and visualization of the thickened arachnoid layers covering the proximal Sylvian fissure.
覆盖大脑外侧裂水平部的蛛网膜比覆盖外侧裂远端的厚，但通常更容易分离。	The arachnoid membranes over the horizontal part of the Sylvian fissure are thicker than those over the most distal section of the fissure and are usually easier to dissect.
厚的蛛网膜层由两层膜组成——额叶和颞叶蛛网膜。	The thicker arachnoid layers are made up of two leaflets of arachnoid—those of the frontal and temporal lobes.
最初打开这一层可以使用蛛网膜刀或向上的11号尖刀，此后在侧裂浅静脉上继续分离。	This layer can be initially opened either using an arachnoid knife or an upturned No. 11 blade knife. The dissection is continued above the superficial Sylvian vein.
表层分离结束后，向内侧颈动脉池方向继续分离。	Once the superficial layer is incised, the arachnoidal incision is carried medially toward the carotid cistern.
在使用显微剪刀前，用剥离子将蛛网膜从脑组织和静脉表面分开，以保护下方组织。	A fine dissector frees up the arachnoid from the underlying brain and veins prior to the use of microscissors.
图9：笔者首先打开视神经颈动脉池释放脑脊液，然后进行外侧裂分离。	Figure 9: I initially open the opticocarotid cisterns to drain cerebrospinal fluid, and then proceed with the Sylvian fissure split.
笔者习惯使用蛛网膜刀打开外侧裂前缘增厚的蛛网膜浅层。	I use an arachnoid knife to open the thickened superficial arachnoid layers over the anterior limb of the Sylvian fissure.
在侧裂内侧分离过程中，笔者用残余的蝶骨嵴边界作为标志或路图以避免器械“四处徘徊”，导致软膜下损伤。	During medial fissure dissection, I use the remaining borders of the sphenoid ridge as a landmark or roadmap to avoid “wandering around” and causing subpial injury.
在出现稠密的蛛网膜下腔出血时，由于分离层面很难识别，路图/标志物是特别必要的。	This road map is especially imperative in the presence of dense subarachnoid hemorrhage because the planes of dissection are difficult to identify.
图10：调整显微镜的视线垂直于外侧裂的水平部。	Figure 10: The microscope’s line of sight is directed perpendicular to the axis of the horizontal fissure.
使用显微剪刀“从内到外”的分离侧裂；在锐性剪开前，用钝球头探子分离和移开缠绕的血管，使其远离蛛网膜层。	Microscissors are used to dissect the fissure using an “inside-to-outside” technique; a blunt ball-tip probe dissects and mobilizes the entangled vessels away from the arachnoid layers before using the microscissors.
图11：在通过外侧裂最近端，可见桥静脉的存在，可以将其牺牲而无明显后果。	Figure 11: Across the very proximal Sylvian fissure, a bridging vein is present that can be sacrificed with impunity.
离断后，额叶和颞叶可以更容易分离。	Once divided, the frontal and temporal lobes can be more readily separated.
图12：利用双极电凝的撑开动作，在外侧裂前部分离精细的蛛网膜带，从外侧裂深部松解额叶。	Figure 12: The spring action of the bipolar forceps may be used to dissect the delicate arachnoid bands within the anterior fissure, detaching the frontal lobe at the depth of the fissure.
图13：将致密的内侧表面蛛网膜层打开后，可见覆盖视神经颈内动脉池的厚的皱褶蛛网膜带，沿水平方向打开，前方达视交叉前池，后方达颈内动脉。	Figure 13: Once the dense medial superficial arachnoid layer is severed, the thick veil of arachnoid band over the opticocarotid cisterns can be seen and opened horizontally as far as the prechiasmatic cistern and posteriorly over the carotid artery.
蛛网膜分离进一步向外侧延伸，即可到达最初打开外侧裂的切口，这两个蛛网膜切口沿颈内动脉前方汇合。	Further lateral extension of this arachnoid opening will meet the initial Sylvian fissure split, and these two arachnoid incisions unite along the anterior aspect of the internal carotid artery.
如果最初的蛛网膜分离无法充分松解脑组织，可在颈内动脉和视神经之间切开liliequist膜进一步从脚间池释放脑脊液。	If the initial arachnoid openings did not achieve adequate brain relaxation, the membrane of Liliequist is incised between the carotid artery and optic nerve to facilitate further egress of cerebrospinal fluid from the interpeduncular cisterns.
如必要释放额外脑脊液，也可锐性打开终板，再根据术中情况分离外侧裂，即可暴露颈动脉分叉部。	If additional cerebrospinal fluid release is deemed necessary, the lamina terminalis may be sharply opened. Additional Sylvian fissure opening may be tailored at this time to expose the carotid artery bifurcation.
一旦打开视神经颈动脉池，继续向内侧分离，锐性松解直回至视交叉的蛛网膜系带，直至显露对侧视神经为止。	Once the opticocarotid cistern is opened, the dissection proceeds medially, shapely freeing up the attachments of the gyrus rectus to the optic chiasm. This maneuver should continue as far as the contralateral optic nerve.
图14：用球形头剥离子和显微剪刀来松解额叶与视神经和视交叉的粘连。	Figure 14: A ball tip dissector and microscissors are used to release the frontal lobe from all its adhesions to the optic nerve and chiasm.
切除嗅束和视神经之间的蛛网膜束带。	The arachnoid bands between the olfactory tract and optic nerve are excised.
现在已经完成了前两个目标，可以安全移动额叶，不用担心力传播到颞叶。	Now that the first two goals have been accomplished, the frontal lobe can be mobilized safely without concern about transmission of force to the temporal lobe.
在上述分离过程中，避免触及颞叶。	Throughout the dissection process described above, the temporal lobe should remain untouched.
下一步是在颅底建立跨过ICA近端的近端控制。	The next step is establishing proximal control over the proximal ICA at the skull base.
为此，在视神经颈内动脉三角近端找到ICA前壁（远离动脉瘤），环绕ICA进行分离，为临时阻断夹提供空间。	To do so, the anterior wall of the ICA (away from the aneurysm) is traced proximally to the opticocarotid triangle, followed by circumferential dissection around the ICA, providing space for the temporary clip blades.
如果这一步分离显露了动脉瘤的近端颈部，但没有足够的空间放置临时阻断夹，则须显露更多ICA近端部分。	If this dissection step exposes the proximal neck of the aneurysm without adequate space for temporary clip deployment, additional exposure of the proximal ICA is mandatory.
两种情况下难以建立近端控制。	There are two situations when it is difficult to establish proximal control.
叠压的镰状韧带可能阻碍了临时阻断夹内侧叶片，此时可在韧带上切一个小口，获得更多的暴露。	The overlying falciform ligament may obscure the medial blade of the temporary clip, in which case a small cut in the ligament allows more exposure.
第二个情况更具挑战性，前床突挡住了PCoA近端的ICA。	The second situation is more challenging, and results when the anterior clinoid process obscures the ICA proximal to the PCoA.
此时需要硬膜内切除部分前床突（intraduralclinoidectomy），去除ICA表面的骨质，以便实现近端控制。	This latter anatomic configuration necessitates a partial intradural clinoidectomy to unroof the ICA so proximal control can be achieved.
磨除前床突前注意切开覆盖床突的硬脑膜并向后翻折覆盖在颈内动脉表面。	The dura over the anterior clinoid is cut and reflected posteriorly over the carotid artery while the clinoidectomy is performed.
术者必须保持耐心，不惜一切代价确保近端控制。	The surgeon must remain patient and ensure proximal control at all costs.
跳过这一步，无法安全的控制近端血管是不符合脑血管外科最基本原则的。	Skipping this step and inability to secure proximal vascular control violates the most fundamental principle in vascular surgery.
图15：向外侧和后方打开蛛网膜直至ICA近端。	Figure 15: The arachnoid membranes are opened lateral and posterior to the proximal ICA.
这些分离同时也打开了延伸向后床突和小脑幕的蛛网膜束带。	One of these incisions opens the thick arachnoid band toward the posterior clinoid and tentorium.
此操作可以使视线无阻挡的观察ICA后方和动眼神经。	This maneuver ensures an unobstructed view of the posterior ICA and oculomotor nerve.
图16：一旦建立可靠的近端ICA控制，常常可沿着ICA的内侧缘，向远离术者的方向，找到PCoA远端。	Figure 16: Once proximal ICA control is reliably established, the more distal segment of the PCoA can often be identified along the medial border of the ICA, coursing away from the surgeon.
在视神经颈内动脉三角内可见PCoA动脉及其穿支。	The artery and its perforators may be visualized through the opticocarotid triangle.
图17：PCoA的起始部往往只能看到一个小凸起，在动脉瘤囊正下方（见上方手绘图）。	Figure 17: The origin of the PCoA is often apparent only as a small knuckle immediately inferior to the aneurysm sac (upper sketch).
动脉瘤永久夹最终就是放置在这个小凸起（箭头，下图）和真正的动脉瘤颈之间。	The permanent clip is later placed between this knuckle (at the arrow, lower photo) and the true neck of the aneurysm.
在接下来动脉瘤颈分离步骤中，通常需要应用临时阻断夹，尤其是对于破裂动脉瘤。	Temporary clip application is often necessary, especially for ruptured aneurysms, during the next steps of aneurysm neck dissection.
动脉瘤分离	Aneurysm Dissection
在动脉瘤夹应用之前，动脉瘤分离的基本原则包括：	The basic tenets of aneurysm dissection before clip application involve:
1．锐性分离蛛网膜，避免过度脑牵拉	Sharp arachnoid dissection and avoidance of excessive brain retraction
2．近端控制，沿正常血管树向动脉瘤颈部进行有系统的分离	Proximal control and methodical dissection along the normal vascular tree toward the aneurysm neck
3．相对大量使用短期临时近端闭塞，使动脉瘤减压，以便术者可以识别和保护邻近穿支	A relatively liberal use of short periods of temporary proximal occlusion to provide aneurysm decompression so that I can identify and protect the neighboring perforators
4．细致和耐心的动脉瘤分离，彻底显示动脉瘤解剖，扫清一个无阻碍的动脉瘤夹闭通道。	Meticulous and patient aneurysm dissection, which thoroughly discovers the aneurysm’s anatomy and clarifies an unhindered corridor for clip application
5．在动脉瘤颈暴露充分前放置永久动脉瘤夹会导致夹闭不充分、穿支损伤甚至术中动脉瘤破裂。	Placement of the permanent clip before an adequate neck exposure leads to inadequate clip ligation, perforator injury, and ultimately intraoperative aneurysm rupture.
当大脑松驰、额叶完全松解和近端控制完成后，术者的焦点转向瘤颈周围分离，也是手术最关键的部分。	With the brain relaxed, the frontal lobe completely released, and proximal control secured, the focus of dissection can now shift toward the circumdissection of the neck, the most critical part of the operation.
上动脉瘤夹是一个相对简单的动作，	Application of the clip is a relatively straightforward affair.
但为动脉瘤夹叶片创造空间则是一种挑战，夹闭前分离既需要手术智慧，也需要对术前影像进行详细研究，对局部三维（3D）解剖了然于心。	The creation of space for the clip blades is the challenge, and preclipping dissection requires surgical intellect and appreciation of three-dimensional (3D) anatomy based on a detailed study of the preoperative images.
动脉瘤囊和PCoA沿远离术者方向走行。	The aneurysm sac and PCoA travel away from the operator.
因此，只能看见一个代表PCoA起始部的小凸起。	As a result, only a small knuckle, representing the origin of the PCoA, is visible.
笔者比较喜欢短暂临时阻断ICA近端；如果Willis环功能存在，我不认为临时阻断期间应用依托咪酯是必要的。	I prefer to use brief periods of temporary proximal ICA occlusion; I do not believe etomidate burst suppression is necessary during temporary proximal ICA occlusion if a functional circle of Willis is present.
在高风险操作过程中，减少动脉瘤充盈可显著加快其瘤颈的分离。	The loss of turgor in the aneurysm remarkably facilitates its neck dissection during high-risk maneuvers.
在这个凸起和动脉瘤颈近端之间继续分离瘤颈，并沿ICA外侧缘继续向远侧分离。	The neck dissection proceeds between this knuckle and the proximal neck of the aneurysm and proceeds distally along the lateral aspect of the ICA.
虽然这个操作可能很乏味，但在高倍放大下锐性分离几乎总是能在PCoA和动脉瘤颈之间找到界面。	Although this maneuver can be tedious, sharp dissection under high magnification almost always finds a plane between the PCoA and the aneurysm neck.
游离仅几毫米的小部分动脉瘤颈，就足够放置动脉瘤夹叶片。	A small section of the aneurysm neck measuring only a few millimeters is isolated, just enough to place a clip blade.
不需要更多的动脉分离或分离到动脉瘤顶。	There is no need to dissect more of the artery or dissect out onto the aneurysm dome.
如果PCoA不容易确定，可以轻轻向外侧牵拉ICA暴露视神经颈动脉三角。	If the PCoA cannot be readily identified, the ICA can be gently retracted laterally to explore the opticocarotid triangle.
因为PCoA是向内侧走行，常可在ICA背后找到，并追溯到近端瘤颈。	Since the PCoA courses medially, it can often be found behind the ICA and traced back to the proximal neck.
在AChA和动脉瘤之间是远端瘤颈；上述类似的显微外科原则同样适用于这个空间。	The distal neck is the space between the AChA and the aneurysm; similar microsurgical principles mentioned above apply to this space as well.
AchA可能粘连在较大的动脉瘤底。	The AChA may be adherent to the fundus of larger aneurysms.
临时阻断ICA特别有利于软化动脉瘤，将瘤颈与AchA分离，无误伤AChA的风险。	Temporary proximal ICA clipping is especially beneficial to soften the aneurysm, allowing dissection of the neck away from the AChA without placing the AChA at risk.
一旦近端和远端瘤颈被分离，PCoA和AChA走行清晰可见时，可以开始动脉瘤最终夹闭。	Once the proximal and distal necks have been dissected and the courses of the PCoA and AChA identified, definitive clipping of the aneurysm can commence.
然而，另外一个步骤是必须的。	However, one further step is mandatory.
术者探查几乎全部动脉瘤颈是重要的。	It is imperative that the surgeon explores the neck of the aneurysm almost in its entirety.
识别动脉瘤颈的深部尤其是一种挑战，因为术者的视线被高流量颈动脉系统供应的令人悸动的动脉瘤阻碍了。	In particular, it is often challenging to identify the deeper part of the aneurysm neck which is visually obstructed by the intimidating pulsatile aneurysm fed through the high-flow carotid system.
在这个阶段，我抵制使用动脉瘤夹的诱惑，相反需要更彻底的检查瘤颈。	At this stage, I resist the temptation to deploy the clip and instead demand a more thorough neck inspection.
临时阻断ICA后，笔者移动近端和远端动脉瘤颈，分离原本在笔者视线之外的瘤颈部分，确保我能看到动脉瘤颈转弯形成内侧边界再移行至ICA的全程。	With temporary ICA occlusion in place, I mobilize the proximal and distal neck and dissect the portion of the neck turning away from my line of sight, ensuring that I can see where the neck turns around to form its medial border with respect to the wall of the ICA.
这个操作是至关重要的，因为对动脉瘤颈缺乏3D解剖理解将导致术者在一个远离ICA轴位的错误角度应用瘤夹，部分夹闭动脉瘤颈和诱发术中破裂。	This maneuver is critical because a lack of understanding of the 3D neck anatomy will lead the operator to apply the clip at a wrong angle away from the ICA axis, partially clipping the neck and precipitating an intraoperative rupture.
用动脉瘤夹进行盲目分离和“猜测深部动脉瘤颈的边界”常招致灾难性后果。	Completing dissection blindly using the clip blades and “guessing the deeper aneurysm neck borders” are recipes for disaster.
这些“新手级”的动作通常来自于一个被情绪所控制的紧张的术者。	These novice maneuvers are a result of a nervous surgeon who allows his or her emotions to control microsurgery.
由于动脉瘤夹放置不当导致瘤颈夹闭不全，结果往往是灾难性的，因为它导致囊内湍流，进而引起术中破裂。	Partial neck closure because of improper clip placement is often catastrophic because it leads to turbulence within the sac and invariably precipitates an intraoperative rupture.
然后新手医生匆忙混乱重新调整动脉瘤夹，并“希望”通过放置多个动脉瘤夹终止出血，这通常超过必要。	The novice surgeon then rushes chaotically to reposition the clip and “hopes” for cessation of bleeding by placing multiple clips, which are often longer than necessary.
由于盲目应用动脉瘤夹，这种技术常常引起穿支损伤，并会导致术后缺血和偏瘫。	This technique often causes perforator injury due to blind application of the clip blades, and it leads to postoperative ischemia and hemiplegia.
在破裂动脉瘤手术中，动脉瘤顶周围的蛛网膜下腔血凝块需待动脉瘤安全夹闭后方可清除。	In ruptured cases, the subarachnoid clot around the dome is left undisturbed until the aneurysm is secured.
分离应该局限在沿床突上ICA后外侧壁和动脉瘤颈部；术者不应该犹豫和无意中刺穿或剥离动脉瘤顶。	The dissection should be limited along the posterolateral wall of the supraclinoid ICA and the neck; the surgeon should not wander and unintentionally puncture or uncover the aneurysm dome.
分离的顺序应该有条不紊地继续从近端到远端，暴露PCoA起始部凸起、近端瘤颈、动脉瘤囊本身、远端瘤颈，然后是视神经颈内动脉三角内的PCoA。	The sequence of dissection should proceed methodically from proximal to distal, revealing the knuckle of the PCoA origin, the proximal neck, the sac itself, the distal neck, and then the PCoA within the opticocarotid triangle.
接下来，开始夹闭。	Next, the clip is deployed.
夹闭	Clip Application
对于大多数小的窄颈PCoA动脉瘤。	Most small PCoA aneurysms have narrow necks.
笔者的同事们用一个简单的直形夹，与ICA轴面垂直并尖端指向外侧夹闭这些动脉瘤。	My colleagues ligate these aneurysms with a simple straight clip, angled perpendicular to the ICA axis with the tips pointing laterally.
虽然这种技术会导致手风琴效应（an accordion effect），并有可能引起ICA管腔狭窄，但对于这类窄颈动脉瘤无需担心。	Although this technique can lead to an accordion effect and potentially cause stenosis of the ICA lumen, this is less of a concern with an aneurysm harboring a narrow neck.
图18：在短暂的临时阻断下动脉瘤可以很好操作和分离。	Figure 18: The aneurysm can be best manipulated and dissected under brief periods of temporary occlusion.
随后应用动脉瘤夹（上方手绘图）注意不应夹闭PCoA的起始部。	Clip application follows (upper illustration.) The origin of the PCoA should not be compromised.
笔者坚持不是垂直（左下图），而是平行（右下图）ICA长轴释放动脉瘤叶片，尤其是对动脉粥样硬化动脉瘤。	I insist on releasing the clip blades not perpendicular (left lower image) but parallel (right lower image) to the long axis of the ICA, especially for atherosclerotic aneurysms.
随着动脉瘤夹叶片逐渐合拢，术者的注意力应集中在叶片上，确保PCoA、AChA、丘脑前穿支、动眼神经不被夹入。	As the clip blades are gradually closed, the surgeon’s attention is focused on the blades to ensure that they are free of the PCoA, AChA, anterior thalamoperforators, and the oculomotor nerve.
图19：用简单直形夹平行于ICA轴夹闭小型向外侧突出的PCoA动脉瘤。	Figure 19: A small laterally-projecting PCoA aneurysm was clipped using a single straight clip parallel to the axis of the ICA.
动脉瘤直接起源于PCoA起始部附近。	The aneurysm arises immediately adjacent to the origin of the PCoA.
与垂直放置直形动脉瘤夹相比，这种夹闭方法更有利于有效地祛除动脉瘤。	Compared with a perpendicular straight clip, this construct is more favorable to effectively exclude the aneurysm.
虽然笔者更喜欢使用简单的直形动脉瘤夹平行于ICA轴，但在解剖学上这不总是可行的，如向后突出的动脉瘤。	Although I prefer to use a simple straight clip parallel to the axis of the ICA, this is not anatomically always feasible, as in the case of posterior-projecting aneurysms.
对于这种动脉瘤，笔者使用一个成角开窗动脉瘤夹，包绕ICA。	For these aneurysms, I use an angled fenestrated clip, encasing the ICA.
这种构造避免了“狗耳朵”现象，对于塌陷动脉瘤颈是最有效的。	This construct avoids “dog ears” and is most effective for collapsing the neck.
此外，迟发的动脉瘤夹移位可能性很小。	Furthermore, delayed clip displacement is unlikely.
图20：使用一个直角开窗动脉瘤夹夹闭小的向后突出的PCoA动脉瘤 （上方手绘图）。	Figure 20: A small PCoA aneurysm projecting posteriorly was clipped using an angled fenestrated clip (upper sketch).
开窗夹环绕着ICA。	The fenestration encircles the ICA.
可见AChA位于动脉瘤夹远端，ICA分叉的近端。	The AChA is shown just distal to the heel of the clip, proximal to the ICA bifurcation.
利用这种方法，即使AChA（箭头）粘附在大的动脉瘤顶，也无需游离AChA（中下照片。）	This construct does not require isolation of the AChA (arrow) in the event of its attachment to the dome of larger aneurysms (middle and lower photos.)
图21：图示夹闭向后突出的PCoA动脉瘤。	Figure 21: An operative view of the final clip construct for a posterior-projecting PCoA aneurysm.
必须注意确保无论是PCoA，还是丘脑内侧穿支都未被无意中夹在动脉瘤夹叶片内。	Care must be taken to ensure that neither the PCoA nor its medial thalamoperforators are inadvertently included in the clip blades.
叶片的尖端不应该累及PCoA起始部。	The tip of the blades should not compromise the PCoA’s origin.
夹闭会轻微的牵引动脉瘤顶，如果动脉瘤囊与颞叶粘连紧密，会发生突如其来的术中破裂。	Clipping can cause slight traction on the aneurysm dome, precipitating premature rupture if the sac is adherent to the temporal lobe.
术者应该继续缓慢闭合瘤夹止血。	The surgeon should continue with slow clip closure to stop the bleeding.
如果夹闭后出血不停止，因考虑动脉瘤夹叶片太短或瘤颈部发生撕裂。	If bleeding does not cease upon clip closure, either the clip blades are too short or a neck tear has occurred.
在这两种情况下，必须进行ICA近端阻断，仔细检查瘤颈部。	In either situation, proximal ICA occlusion is mandatory and careful inspection of the neck is warranted.
笔者避免两端夹闭ICA，因为在近端ICA阻断情况下，它的逆向血流通常是可控的。	I avoid trapping the ICA because its retrograde flow is often manageable under only proximal ICA occlusion.
夹闭向内侧突出的动脉瘤时，动脉瘤夹叶片远端可能被后床突挡住，无法获得最佳夹闭位置。	Clip ligation of medially-projecting aneurysms requires the distal clip blades to negotiate with the posterior clinoid that can hinder optimal clip placement.
在这种情况下成角开窗动脉瘤夹特别有用。	Angled fenestrated clips can be especially useful in this circumstance.
除非证明有其他原因，否则运动诱发电位的丧失很可能是AChA/PChA及其穿支被损伤的标志。	Loss of motor evoked potentials is most likely due to compromise of the AChA/PCoA and their perforators until proven otherwise.
荧光视频造影评价PCoA动脉瘤夹闭效果有一定的局限性。	Fluorescence videoangiogram has certain limitations for evaluating PCoA aneurysms after their ligation.
最常见的，由于手术部位深、有可能存在隐匿的ACoA动脉瘤，囊内无法聚集足够的荧光剂，激发光无法形成足够亮度供相机识别。	Most often, because of the deep operative corridor and the hidden ACoA aneurysm, enough excitation light cannot reach the fluorescent agent within the sac for the camera to detect the emission signals.
这种现象会导致假阴性结果（认为动脉瘤已经被夹闭而事实上没有。译者注）。	This phenomenon leads to false negative results.
因此，需要穿刺动脉瘤顶或术中DSA血管造影证实动脉瘤已消失。	Therefore, puncture of the dome or intraoperative catheter angiogram is necessary for confirmation of aneurysm exclusion.
动脉瘤囊穿刺后，应该小心移动确保PCoA/AChA和它们的穿支血管不包含在叶片内。	After the sac is punctured, it should be carefully mobilized to ensure that the PCoA/AChA and their perforating vessels are not incorporated within the blades.
如果术前存在动眼神经功能障碍，穿刺减压就显得尤为重要。	The puncture is especially important for decompression of the oculomotor nerve if corresponding preoperative cranial nerve dysfunction was present.
笔者不从神经上分离动脉瘤圆顶，避免对神经造成损伤。	I do not dissect the aneurysm dome from the nerve to avoid traumatic neuropathy.
PCoA动脉瘤可表现为各种不同形态。	A variety of morphologies are found among PCoA aneurysms.
额外注意事项	Additional Considerations
图22. 球状或大型动脉瘤可以掩盖PCoA起始部。	Figure 22: Bulbous or large aneurysms can obscure the origin of the PCoA.
穿支可以附着于动脉瘤穹顶远端，使它很难完全从瘤颈上游离。	Perforators may be attached to the far side of the dome, making it difficult to completely isolate the neck.
有必要更广泛的分离外侧裂暴露ICA分叉，确保识别AChA起始部（插图。）	A more extensive fissure dissection is necessary to expose the ICA bifurcation and ensure identification of the AChA origin (inset image.)
图23. 最好是在临时阻断ICA情况下，轻柔的移动动脉瘤的中间部可显示PCoA起始部。	Figure 23: Gentle mobilization of the midbody of the aneurysm, preferably under temporary ICA occlusion, can barely reveal the origin of the PCoA.
图24. 一旦确认PCoA起始部的“突起”并估计环绕动脉瘤下极PCoA的路线，直动脉瘤夹与ICA轴平行放置萎陷瘤颈。	Figure 24: Once the “knuckle” of the PCoA origin has been identified and the route of the PCoA around the inferior pole of the aneurysm is estimated, a straight clip is deployed to collapse the neck parallel to the axis of the ICA.
用垂直夹（插图），特别是在厚壁和动脉粥样硬化动脉瘤情况下，可导致夹闭不全、囊内涡流和破裂。	Perpendicular clip application (inset image,) especially in the case of a thick-walled and atherosclerotic aneurysms, leads to partial clipping, intrasaccular turbulence, and rupture.
图25：在特殊病例和压迫动眼神经引起神经病变的动脉瘤，可将其萎陷、抽吸，然后夹闭。	Figure 25: In select cases and for aneurysms causing compressive oculomotor neuropathy, the aneurysm can be trapped, deflated, and then clip ligated.
如果存在优势P1段逆行供应发出丘脑穿支，可以牺牲闭锁的PCoAs。	Atretic PCoAs may be sacrificed as long as a dominant P1 is present for retrograde supply to the thalamoperforators.
相反，胚胎PCA不能牺牲并应尽一切努力保护其血流。	On the contrary, a fetal PCA cannot be sacrificed and every effort should be made to preserve its flow.
图26：PCoA动脉瘤偶尔突到小脑幕缘下。	Figure 26: PCoA aneurysms occasionally project underneath the edge of the tentorium.
完全暴露瘤颈可能需要在小脑幕切一个小切口。	Complete exposure of the neck may require a small incision in the tentorium.
有些动脉瘤囊甚至同时突入在小脑幕上下的脑叶中。	Some aneurysm sacs even harbor lobes both above and below the tentorium.
大型和巨大型动脉瘤	Large and Giant Aneurysms
对于这类动脉瘤暴露的技术细节与小型动脉瘤一样。	The technical nuances for exposure of these aneurysms are the same as for smaller aneurysms.
然而，准备使用抽吸减压技术往往能收到较好的效果。	However, preparation for the use of suction-decompression technique often proves rewarding.
在分离和夹闭大型和巨大型PCoA动脉瘤过程中，有一些困难因素。	Certain limitations prevail during dissection and clip ligation of large and giant PCoA aneurysms.
较大的动脉瘤常常从单个直动脉瘤夹叶片远端“溜出来”。	Larger aneurysms often splay the distal blades of the single straight clip.
使用开窗动脉瘤夹夹闭远端瘤颈，以串联的短直动脉瘤夹夹闭近端瘤颈，可以有效地解决这个问题。	The use of a fenestrated clip(s) to close the distal neck, followed by a short tandem straight clip to close the proximal neck, may effectively solve this problem.
然而，由于解剖限制，大动脉瘤几乎总是无法充分分离瘤颈，进而放置直动脉瘤夹。	However, because of anatomic constraints, large aneurysms almost always prevent their effective neck dissection for placement of straight clips.
只有瘤颈的内侧和外侧边可以分离。	Only the medial and lateral borders of the neck are dissectable.
直动脉瘤夹垂直与ICA长轴应用时，可能因为叶片夹闭不当或部分夹闭而导致动脉瘤术中破裂的结果。	The application of straight clips perpendicular to the ICA axis may lead to intraoperative rupture because of inadequate clip blade closure and resultant partial clipping.
此外，直夹也可能出现术后移位。	In addition, the straight clip may be displaced postoperatively.
基于上述原因，笔者更喜欢通过使用成角有窗动脉瘤夹，平行于ICA轴夹闭任何宽颈或严重动脉粥样硬化动脉瘤，有效避免ICA上手风琴效应（an accordion effect）和瘤颈残余。	For the reasons mentioned above, I prefer to clip any wide-neck or heavily atherosclerotic aneurysm parallel to the axis of the ICA by using an angled fenestrated clip.
残余瘤颈通常在垂直夹闭时出现。	This avoids an accordion effect on the ICA and a residual neck, which is often seen with perpendicular clipping.
图27：图例是大型宽颈PCoA动脉瘤。	Figure 27: A large PCoA aneurysm with a wide neck is illustrated.
两个有窗夹以串联形式放置完全封闭瘤颈。	Two fenestrated clips are placed in tandem formation to fully occlude the neck.
左边动脉瘤夹远端显示AChA。	The AChA is shown just distal to the left clip.
这种构造是理想的，因为两个动脉瘤夹能有效夹闭粥样硬化的瘤颈。	This construct is ideal because two clips close the atherosclerotic neck effectively.
双夹结构也能更灵活地调整叶片，就如笔者操作动脉瘤夹保护AChA和PCoA起始部一样。	The two-clip construct also provides more flexibility for directing the blades as I maneuver the clips to preserve the origins of the AChA and PCoA.
请参见图20。	Please also see Figure 20, above.
图28：图示一个巨大的PCoA动脉瘤。	Figure 28: A giant PCoA aneurysm is illustrated.
AChA包裹在动脉瘤一侧并附着紧密。	The AChA is draped over the aneurysm pole and is very adherent.
由于ICA腔重建是必要的，在应用动脉瘤夹前，必须有效抽吸动脉瘤以便能够移动瘤囊。	Because reconstruction of the ICA lumen is necessary, the aneurysm must be effectively deflated before clip application so the sac can be manipulated.
图29：在夹闭巨型动脉瘤时抽吸减压技术是非常有用的。	Figure 29: The suction-decompression technique is very useful during ligation of giant aneurysms.
使用叠加有窗夹闭塞瘤颈，	Stacked fenestrated clips are used to obliterate the neck.
再应用“增强”或“加固”动脉瘤夹跨过初始夹，增加它们的夹闭压力。	A “booster” or “bolster” clip can be applied over the initial clips to increase their closing pressure.
如果术中血管造影显示囊填充持久时，这种技术尤其必要。	This technique is especially necessary if the intraoperative angiogram reveals persistent filling of the sac.
利用动脉瘤夹重建宽大的ICA腔也很重要，因为腔外检查可能低估由ICA厚壁导致ICA狭窄的程度。	It is imperative to clip reconstruct the ICA lumen generously because extraluminal inspection can underestimate the degree of ICA stenosis incurred by the thick walls of the ICA.
动脉瘤夹放置后，必须仔细检查确保所有相关血管完好无损。	After clip deployment, the construct must be carefully inspected to ensure preservation of all relevant vessels.
具体地说，必须确认AChA没有无意中受影响。	Specifically, one must confirm that the AChA is not inadvertently affected.
显微多普勒超声和荧光血管造影可用于确保血管通畅和动脉瘤完全闭塞。	Microdoppler ultrasonography and fluorescence angiography may be used to ensure patency of the vessels and complete aneurysm obliteration.
动脉瘤夹有可能发生位移，通常使用串联夹解决。	Clip displacement is possible and usually resolved with the use of a tandem clip.
病人血压在术中应该保持正常或略升高来测试在较高压力下动脉瘤夹是否会移位。	The patient’s blood pressure should be kept normal or slightly elevated intraoperatively to disclose the potential risk of clip displacement with higher pressures.
最后，一旦动脉瘤安全夹闭、动眼神经受压可以缓解。	Finally, once the aneurysm is secured, oculomotor compression can be relieved.
穿刺和抽吸动脉瘤。	The aneurysm is punctured and deflated.
术中破裂	Intraoperative Rupture
有关术中动脉瘤破裂的相关细节请参阅“术中破裂处理（Management of Intraoperative Rupture）”一章。	Please refer to the Management of Intraoperative Rupture chapter for further details on the topic.
偏瘫是一个非常致残的并发症，原因几乎总是从PCoA、AChA或发出的穿支甚至PCoA本身受损的结果，应尽一切努力避免这种不幸的结果。	Hemiparesis is a very disabling complication, nearly always the result of trapping the perforators arising from the PCoA, the AChA, or the PCoA itself. Every effort should be made to avoid this unfortunate outcome.
术后按标准的护理执行。	Standard postoperative care is employed.
推荐术后使用抗癫痫药物治疗，大约一周后逐渐停药。	Anticonvulsants are recommended and tapered off about one week after surgery.
· 一般来说，在获得近端控制前，应严格避免牵拉颞叶。	Generally, retraction of the temporal lobe should be strictly avoided until proximal control is obtained.
瘤颈最终分离步骤可以在完全临时阻断下完成。	The final neck dissection can be completed under temporary occlusion.
· PCoA起始部可能被误认为为动脉近端瘤颈，术者必须仔细解剖分离避免夹闭PCoA。	The origin of the PCoA can be mistaken for the proximal neck of the aneurysm. This anatomy must be carefully dissected to avoid occlusion of the PCoA.
· 尽管直动脉瘤夹可以适应大多数PCoA动脉瘤，非典型突出或宽颈动脉瘤需要成角有窗夹，并注意使动脉瘤夹叶片与ICA平行放置。	Although a straight clip can accommodate most PCoA aneurysms, those with atypical projections or wide necks require angled fenestrated clips with their blades parallel to the ICA.
· 巨大动脉瘤需要两端夹闭和穿刺减压后才能完成分离和重建性夹闭。	Giant aneurysms require trapping and needle decompression to complete the dissection and clip reconstruction.
来自未闭塞的PCoA血流可能相当凶猛，在开始减压之前应该考虑风险。	The perfusion from an unoccluded PCoA can be quite brisk, and this risk should be considered before proceeding with decompression.
颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤	Internal Carotid Artery Bifurcation Aneurysm
颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤相对少见，约占颅内动脉瘤的5%-10%，好发于小儿，而且常常伴有同侧颈内动脉的其他类型动脉瘤。	Aneurysms at the bifurcation of the internal carotid artery (ICA) are uncommon lesions, accounting for approximately 5-10% of intracranial aneurysms. They frequently occur in conjunction with other aneurysms on the ipsilateral ICA, and appear to be more prevalent among the pediatric population.
与基底动脉尖端类似，血流动力学压力作用于颈内动脉分叉部致使动脉瘤形成。	The hemodynamic stress at the ICA bifurcation, like the one at the basilar bifurcation, leads to aneurysm formation.
绝大部分颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤的指向为上方、稍偏后，出现破裂时将造成蛛网膜下腔出血，甚至可能破入脑实质，引起额下回、基底节或者颞叶内份的血肿。	Rupture of an ICA bifurcation aneurysm causes subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and may even cause intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) in the inferior frontal lobe, basal ganglia, or medial temporal lobe. Most ICA bifurcation aneurysms point superiorly and slightly posteriorly.
分离瘤颈、实施夹闭的过程中必须避免误伤A1、颈内动脉分叉部、脉络前动脉、Heubner回返动脉及M1段发出的穿支血管。	Preservation of the medial and posterior perforators arising from the medial borders of the A1, ICA bifurcation, anterior choroidal artery, recurrent artery of Heubner, and M1 segments is imperative during dissection of the aneurysm neck and clip deployment.
手术适应征	Indications for Surgery
小于25mm的ICA动脉瘤的年破裂风险相对较低，约为1%，当大于25mm后将升至10%。	The ICA aneurysms carry a fairly low annual rupture risk of ~1% until they grow larger than 25 mm, at which point their annual rupture risk increases to 10%.
ICA分叉部动脉瘤的占位效应几乎不会引起临床症状，动脉瘤是否需要治疗取决于许多因素，包括：患者的年龄和一般情况、一级亲属是否有蛛网膜下腔出血的病史，以及动脉瘤的特点（比如随访中明显增大、伴有异常形态、瘤顶存在小泡）。	Numerous factors affect the need for treatment, including the age and general health of the patient, a first-degree relative with a history of SAH, and the specific characteristics of the aneurysm such as demonstrated growth, abnormal aneurysm morphology, and the presence of a blister on the dome. Aneurysms in this location are almost never symptomatic secondary to their mass effect.
单纯血管内治疗适用于具有合适瘤颈/瘤顶比的患者。	With an appropriate neck-to-dome ratio, these aneurysms may be treated with endovascular therapy alone.
瘤颈累及近端A1或M1段时，可尝试球囊或支架辅助的弹簧圈栓塞。	If the proximal segment of the parent A1 or M1 is incorporated into the aneurysm neck, balloon-assisted or stent coiling are possible treatment options.
血流转向装置目前仍然很少用于ICA分叉部的动脉瘤，但这项技术迅速扩展着介入治疗的适应征。	Flow-diverters are not commonly used for ICA bifurcation aneurysms at this time, but this technology is rapidly expanding the indications for endovascular intervention.
如果不伴有蛛网膜下腔出血，ICA分叉部动脉瘤引起的脑实质出血类似于高血压性基底节出血。	In the absence of SAH, the ICH caused by ICA bifurcation aneurysms can mimic hypertensive basal ganglia hemorrhage.
钙化的动脉瘤会更适合介入治疗，但是直接承受ICA输入端高流量的血流动力学压力显著增加了术后弹簧圈压缩的风险。	Calcified aneurysms are more suitable for endovascular intervention but the risk of coil compaction is significant due to the direct hemodynamic stress of the afferent high flow ICA.
相比M1段，CTA等术前影像常常提示瘤颈累及A1段的范围更广，	Preoperative imaging including CT angiography frequently demonstrates the extension of the aneurysm neck more on the A1 rather than M1.
这在构建手术计划和设计夹闭通道时是很重要的。	This anatomy is important for surgical planning and trajectory of clip application.
发达的前交通动脉暗示良好的对侧代偿，因此，若术中出现动脉瘤破裂，夹闭A1近端是安全的。	The presence of a functional anterior communicating artery (ACoA) indicates the ischemic tolerance and safety of proximal A1 ligation in the event of intraoperative rupture.
图1：一例典型的ICA分叉部动脉瘤，	Figure 1: A classic ICA bifurcation aneurysm is demonstrated.
穿支血管绕着瘤顶走形。	Note the perforating vessel draping over the dome.
插图为术后CTA，可见术中使用了串联夹闭技术，同期夹闭一个小的脉络前动脉瘤。	Clip exclusion was accomplished via tandem clipping (inset). The small anterior choroidal aneurysm was also clipped in this patient.
基于解剖学，ICA分叉部动脉瘤与基底动脉尖动脉瘤具有许多相似性：起源于大血管分叉处、瘤颈可能不同程度地累及载瘤和分支动脉、许多穿支血管绕行在动脉瘤的内侧或后方。	Aneurysms of the ICA bifurcation have been compared with basilar bifurcation aneurysms in the basic details of their anatomy. They arise from the bifurcation of a major vessel, potentially incorporating a variable extent of each afferent and efferent branch into their aneurysm neck, with numerous perforators located at the medial or posterior base of the aneurysm.
图2：右侧标本。在外侧裂蝶骨段的近端，床突上段ICA最终分为MCA的M1段和ACA的A1段，	Figure 2: The right supraclinoid ICA bifurcates into the M1 branch of the MCA and the A1 branch of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA,) within the proximal sphenoidal segment of the Sylvian fissure.
M1沿后外侧方向走形于侧裂里，A1则转向内侧并跨过视神经和视交叉。	The M1 courses posterolaterally further into the fissure, while the A1 turns medially to cross over the optic nerve and chiasm.
图片清晰显示了A1和M1近端发出的穿支动脉。	Note the perforating vessels arising from the proximal A1 and M1 branches.
ICA分叉部动脉瘤通常起源于ICA后壁并且偏向A1一侧。	Aneurysms of the ICA bifurcation usually arise from the posterior aspect of the ICA and are often eccentric toward the A1.
ICA为后上走形，因此动脉瘤同样朝向后上。	The artery is normally oriented superiorly and posteriorly, thus its aneurysms also project in these directions.
ICA分叉部通常没有穿支血管，但其附近存在内、外两组豆纹动脉，内侧组起自A1，外侧组则为M1。	Two groups of lenticulostriate arteries (LSAs) arise near the ICA bifurcation: medial and lateral. The lateral LSAs arise from the M1 segment, and the medial LSAs arise from the A1 segment.
豆纹动脉经常与动脉瘤顶有黏连，使得夹闭过程复杂化。	The bifurcation proper is often devoid of these perforators that are often adherent to the aneurysm dome and complicate clip application.
Heubner回返动脉一般由A1-A2交界处的ACA往外侧发出，在A1后方与其平行走形，是内侧豆纹动脉最靠内、靠前的一组。	The recurrent artery of Heubner is the most medial and anterior of the medial LSAs, often arising laterally from the ACA at the A1–A2 junction and travelling parallel to A1 posteriorly.
在额下沿视神经上方做分离时，Heubner回返动脉有时是术者遇到的第一根血管，应引起注意。	The surgeon should look for this recurrent artery, which may be the first vessel encountered when he or she is dissecting subfrontally along the superior aspect of the optic nerve.
脉络前动脉是床突上段ICA最上端的非终末分支，其主干或穿支血管可能会与这些后内指向的ICA分叉部动脉瘤黏连紧密，临时阻断ICA、松动瘤顶、锐性分离可避免损伤。	The most superior nonterminal branch of the supraclinoid ICA is the anterior choroidal artery. In patients with posteriorly and medially projecting aneurysms, the dome may become intimately involved with this artery or its perforating branches. Temporary occlusion of the ICA, mobilization of the dome, and sharp dissection of the artery are needed to avoid its sacrifice.
内外两组豆纹动脉往上进入前穿质、视器和颞叶内侧，处于术野盲区，镜下可见这些血管与动脉瘤顶和/或瘤颈的后、内方有密切关系，手术操作有可能导致血管痉挛甚至撕裂，因此，保护这些至关重要的穿支动脉是术中最具挑战性的环节，同时，建议适当使用罂粟碱。	The medial and lateral LSAs pose the greatest challenge to the operator given their location posterior and medial to the aneurysm dome and within the operative blind spot. These vital perforators extend superiorly into the anterior perforated substance, optic apparatus, and medial temporal lobe. They can be microscopic and intimately adherent to the posterior and medial aneurysm neck and/or dome. Their manipulation can lead to vasospasm or even their dissection.  Liberal use of papaverine is advised.
图3：ICA分叉部与豆纹动脉（Len.St.A.）的解剖。	Figure 3: The anatomy of ICA bifurcation and relevant lenticulostriate arteries (Len. St. A.) is shown.
广泛开放外侧裂是提供最佳手术通道的方式。	Wide Sylvian fissure dissection provides the most effective corridor to the bifurcation.
显微手术夹闭ICA分叉部动脉瘤	MICROSURGICAL CLIP LIGATION OF ICA BIFURCATION ANEURYSMS
常规选用扩大翼点入路：患者的头部旋转30°，并使颧骨隆突位于术区最高点，如此可以缓解颞叶塌陷后突入经外侧裂的手术通道里。	The extended pterional craniotomy is typically employed for clip ligation of ICA aneurysms. The patient’s head is rotated 30 degrees and the malar eminence is the highest point in the operative field. This head posture minimizes intrusion of the temporal lobe by its collapse on the transsylvian corridor.
开颅时骨窗上界应越过颞上线，去除外侧蝶骨嵴以扩大手术空间。	The craniotomy extends just above the superior temporal line. Resection of the lateral sphenoid wing expands the operative space toward the ICA bifurcation.
图4：对于ICA分叉部动脉瘤，无需过多显露额叶，同时，眶上裂以外的蝶骨嵴应完全去除，骨窗暴露范围如图示。	Figure 4: The breadth of the pterional craniotomy for this aneurysm type is illustrated. Significant frontal extension of the craniotomy is typically unnecessary. The lateral sphenoid wing is resected to the level of the superior orbital fissure.
硬膜下操作过程	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
起始阶段的显露	Initial Exposure
有远端-近端、近端-远端两种方式来暴露MCA分叉处动脉瘤，同样，在蛛网膜下腔分离显露ICA分叉部动脉瘤时也有两种策略。	Similar to MCA bifurcation aneurysms that may be exposed from distal-to-proximal or proximal-to-distal, there are also two strategies for subarachnoid dissection to expose ICA bifurcation aneurysms.
方法1：由内往外	Technique 1: The Inside-Out Technique
即首先打开鞍旁与视神经-颈内动脉池，随后从近端向远端开放外侧裂，追踪ICA行径至最终的分叉处。	The first technique is referred to as the inside-out technique, whereby the parasellar and opticocarotid cisterns are split first, and then the Sylvian fissure is dissected from proximal to distal, while following the course of the ICA, to expose the carotid bifurcation.
轻轻牵拉额底后部可获得理想的手术通道。	Gentle elevation of the posterior basal frontal lobe expands the desired operative pathway toward the bifurcation.
个人经验，近端-远端分离外侧裂的方式需要过度上抬额底，技术操作上也比较不方便。	In my experience, proximal-to-distal dissection of the fissure is technically awkward and exerts undue retraction on the basal frontal lobe.
方法2：由外往内	Technique 2: The Outside-In Technique
先是分离外侧裂远端，在侧裂的水平支里沿M1前下方追寻ICA分叉处。	The second technique begins with a distal Sylvian fissure split, with pursuit of the anterior and inferior aspects of M1 to expose the carotid bifurcation through the horizontal limb of the fissure.
辨认床突上ICA，逐渐分离至分叉部，	The supraclinoid ICA is identified and dissection proceeds along the ICA to the bifurcation.
随后显露A1和M1段的近端。	The proximal M1 and A1 segments are exposed.
动脉瘤常常偏向A1一侧，而且瘤颈广泛累及A1，因此，A1段必须被彻底游离出来。	The A1 segment must be thoroughly unveiled because ICA bifurcation aneurysms are often eccentric toward the A1; this efferent vessel is intimately involved with the neck.
笔者常规使用外-内这种方法，特别是在破裂动脉瘤伴出血后脑肿胀的病例可以减轻对额叶的牵拉。	I routinely use the outside-in technique, especially for ruptured aneurysms, to minimize the degree of frontal lobe retraction on a swollen post-SAH brain.
前述两种方法都必须识别脉络前动脉远端的ICA，以便放置临时阻断夹。	Both techniques require identification of the proximal ICA distal to the anterior choroidal artery for placement of a temporary clip should this become necessary.
实际操作中常常需要牺牲侧裂前端和视神经外侧的一条小的桥静脉。	This maneuver often requires division of a small bridging vein found along the anterior Sylvian fissure and lateral to the optic nerve.
图5：沿内、后方向分离侧裂进入其水平段以暴露ICA的床突上段及分叉部，	Figure 5: The Sylvian fissure dissection is carried medially and posteriorly into the horizontal segment of the fissure to expose the supraclinoid ICA and bifurcation.
这样便可在早期控制载瘤动脉近端，而且由于开放相应的脑池释放脑脊液实现了脑松弛。	This approach provides early proximal control and brain relaxation via cerebrospinal fluid egress through the corresponding cisterns.
临时阻断ICA时应识别并保护后方的脉络前动脉。	The anterior choroidal artery along the posterior wall of the carotid is identified and protected during temporary clip deployment.
图6：动脉瘤被后内份额底所掩盖，因此，为了避免术中破裂，轻柔地牵拉这部分脑组织是必要的。	Figure 6: Gentle mobilization of the medial posterior basal frontal lobe is necessary to avoid premature intraoperative rupture of the aneurysm sac that is embedded in this portion of the lobe.
适当阻断ICA可以使术者往外侧移动瘤颈，然后分离瘤颈内侧壁的穿支动脉，临时阻断夹置于脉络前动脉以远。	The location of the temporary clip distal to the anterior choroidal artery is shown. I use temporary clipping liberally so that I can mobilize the neck laterally and dissect the A1 and M1 perforating vessels away from the medial wall of the aneurysm neck.
控制近端ICA后，就可以从位于动脉瘤和M1（非A1）之间的外侧瘤颈开始解剖动脉瘤。	Once proximal control has been secured, the final dissection of the aneurysm begins at the lateral neck between the aneurysm and the M1, rather than at the A1.
图7：提倡锐性分离（下图），避免使用钝性分离（上图）。分离顺序应该是先M1、后A1，因为：解剖位于A1与动脉瘤之间的内侧瘤颈往往更具挑战性；此外，若游离完M1之后发生动脉瘤破裂，术者可以将近端A1和动脉瘤共同阻断，这时，M1依然保留原先的顺行血流，而A1由前交通复合体逆向灌注，若无法应用棉片辅助夹闭技术处理撕裂的瘤颈，则将临时阻断夹置换为永久性夹（见下文的图21）。	Figure 7: The order of dissection at the M1 before A1 is illustrated. The blunt technique (top image) is generally avoided and sharp dissection is used (bottom image). This order of dissection is important because isolation of the medial neck between the A1 and the aneurysm is often more challenging. In addition, if an intraoperative rupture occurs after the isolation of M1, a temporary clip may be placed to incorporate the aneurysm and the proximal A1. This maneuver will maintain anterograde irrigation of the M1 and retrograde irrigation of the A1 via the anterior communicating artery complex.  The temporary clip may be exchanged with a permanent clip if the neck tear is not amenable to the cotton-clipping technique (please see Figure 18 below.)
随后朝向A1继续往内侧分离瘤颈。	I continue dissection medially on the neck toward the A1.
建议在高倍镜下从瘤颈钝性/锐性分离出A1、M1，	For both sides of the neck, sharp/blunt dissection under high magnification is the preferred method for developing the plane between the M1/A1 and the neck.
并且一定要保护好所有穿支动脉。	All the perforators have to be spared.
图8：沿近端M1彻底解剖外侧裂增加了后方平行于瘤颈内侧壁的视野和空间，有利于分离穿支动脉，这在大的或宽颈的动脉瘤手术中是必须的。	Figure 8: For larger or more broad-based aneurysms, I need a wider viewing space parallel to the medial wall of the neck to dissect the perforators. To do so, I split the fissure along the proximal M1 more thoroughly to expand the working angle behind the neck.
图9：瘤颈后方隐藏有与之黏连的穿支血管、脉络前和Heubner回返动脉，	Figure 9: The posterior aspect of the neck can obscure the adherent perforators and the anterior choroidal and Huebner arteries.
术中经常需要临时阻断近端ICA以便更彻底地松解瘤颈。	More thorough mobilization of the sac is often needed using temporary clip ligation of the proximal ICA.
术者应该轻柔、仔细、全方位地探查这部分瘤颈，确保所有穿支已被解离，	The surgeon should remain diligent and persistent, fully exploring this area of the neck to confirm that it has been cleared of all perforating vessels.
避免盲视下置入动脉瘤夹。	Blind passage of the blades of the permanent clip should be avoided.
最后，靠A1侧的远端瘤颈也被分离出来，术者已可以在瘤颈内外两侧做操作。完全控制从M1延伸至A1的瘤颈全程是实施安全夹闭的有效保障。	Finally, the distal neck along the A1 is isolated while the surgeon works lateral and medial to the neck. I ensure clear visualization of the medial neck from its base along the M1 all the way to the A1 so that a clear path for the blades is secured.
图10：宽颈动脉瘤手术中，在穿支血管与瘤颈之间垫入明胶海绵隔离两者，	Figure 10: Small Gelfoam pledgets may be inserted to keep the perforating vessels away from the neck for broad-based aneurysms.
当随后伸进瘤夹的咬合叶片时，夹子尖端往前推移海绵，而不会误伤到后方的小动脉。	During passage of the final permanent clip blades, the tips of the blades push these pledgets forward; however, the perforating vessels remain protected.
下文图12将有更详细介绍。	Please see Figure 12 below for more details.
实施夹闭	Clip Application
使用何种动脉瘤夹取决于瘤顶的朝向：直夹或稍带角度的夹子足以夹闭经典的后上指向型动脉瘤；成角夹则可以更好地直视瘤夹咬合叶片的置入过程。	The optimal clip construct depends on the projection of the aneurysm dome. For the typical superiorly and posteriorly projecting aneurysms, a straight or slightly angled clip is effective. The angled clip provides better visualization of the blades during their insertion.
图11：使用稍带角度的动脉瘤夹闭合瘤颈。	Figure 11: A slightly angled clip is used to collapse the aneurysm neck.
一旦夹子的咬合叶片已到位就可以缓缓释放瘤夹，注意不要造成MCA起始部扭曲或管腔狭窄，	Once the blades are in place around the neck, the blades are gently approximated while any stenosis or inadvertent kink in the MCA origin is avoided.
因此常常需要轻柔地微调瘤夹位置以防瘤颈残留或者载瘤动脉狭窄。	The exact location of the clip blades along the neck often needs to be gently and slightly adjusted to avoid any neck remnant and compromise of the M1’s and A1’s origins.
实施夹闭时，A1近端是视野最差的区域之一，尤其是瘤颈和ICA分叉部解剖上可能会将A1推离术者的视线。	One of the minimally viewable spots during clip application is the proximal A1, especially if the anatomy of the aneurysm neck and bifurcation positions this vessel coursing away from the surgeon’s line of sight.
此时往往无法在直视A1起始部的条件下释放瘤夹，所以必要时应调整夹子位置做好塑形。	In these instances, the final moments in the slow gradual closure of the clip blades barely reveals the origin of A1, allowing an opportunity for minor adjustments in clip position. Clip repositioning may be necessary for a desirable construct.
若瘤颈累及M1多一些，使用直夹更合适。	If the neck is asymmetrically shared by the proximal M1, a straight clip is more appropriate.
若瘤颈主要累及A1，小角度的成角夹不仅能紧贴A1夹闭瘤颈，同时可以避免闭塞穿支动脉的出口，因此更适用。	However, if the neck is predominantly on the proximal A1, a slightly angled clip is potentially more desirable so that the neck is closed parallel to the A1 parent vessel, avoiding an accordion effect that can collapse the inlets of the perforating vessels.
图12：如前述，在穿支血管与瘤颈内侧之间垫入小片明胶海绵隔离两者，当瘤夹的内侧咬合叶片绕过瘤颈时，海绵被前推以保护后方的小穿支。	Figure 12: As mentioned above, very small pieces of Gelfoam may be inserted on the medial surface of the neck to keep the numerous perforating vessels away from the pathway of the medial blade. As the medial clip blade slides around the neck, these Gelfoam pledgets are pushed forward and the perforators are protected.
图13：夹闭完成后行荧光造影明确动脉瘤是否完全闭塞以及载瘤动脉和穿支血管的通畅程度，	Figure 13: After final application of the clip, fluorescence videoangiogram confirms complete aneurysm occlusion and patency of the parent and perforating vessels.
但是要注意穿支动脉的显影效果本身就不好。	The perforators may not be easily visible using fluorescence.
之后细针穿刺瘤顶证实动脉瘤血流已被阻断。	Next, I perforate the dome with a needle to confirm its complete exclusion from the circulation.
插图表示使用吸引器清除瘤腔内的血液使瘤壁塌陷。	Suction can evacuate the intrasaccular blood and collapse the sac (inset image).
图14：瘤腔塌陷后再次彻底探查瘤周，必须保证穿支血管通畅。	Figure 14: A circumferential dissection around the collapsed sac is mandatory to confirm the patency of the perforators.
若有瘤颈残余，可以阻断ICA后调整瘤夹。	Neck remnant may require clip repositioning after reapplication of a temporary clip on the ICA.
图15：右侧颈内动脉分叉部的小动脉瘤（上图），穿支动脉位于瘤颈后方（左下图），术中使用一枚小直夹夹闭（右下图）。	Figure 15:  A small right-sided ICA bifurcation aneurysm is demonstrated (upper image). Note the perforator behind the aneurysm neck (lower left image).  This aneurysm was clipped using a small straight clip (lower right image).
图16：一例较大的右侧ICA分叉部动脉瘤。	Figure 16: A large right-sided aneurysm was clip ligated using a straight clip.
阻断ICA后探查囊壁后极（左上图），随后开始夹闭（右上图）。	The posterior pole of the sac (left upper image) was inspected under temporary ICA occlusion before clip deployment (right upper image).
伴粥样硬化斑块的动脉瘤可能要用到串联夹闭技术（下图-该患者合并有脉络前动脉动脉瘤，一并予以夹闭）。	Atherosclerotic aneurysms may demand tandem clipping (lower image-an anterior choroidal aneurysm was also clipped in this patient).
下图中的右上插图为术者在分离外侧豆纹动脉。	Note the dissection of the M1 perforators (lower image-right upper inset).
图17：一例钙化的巨大型动脉瘤（上图），获取桡动脉行颈外动脉-颈内动脉的高流量搭桥（中间图），随后永久闭塞脉络前动脉以远的ICA（下图）。	Figure 17:  A patient with a giant calcified ICA bifurcation aneurysm (upper image) underwent high-flow radial artery (ECA-ICA) (middle image) bypass followed by definitive proximal occlusion of the ICA (lower image) distal to the anterior choroidal artery.
动脉瘤的变异	Aneurysmal Variations
颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤存在多种变异，熟识各种变异在制定手术计划时非常重要。	Numerous variations are possible for an ICA bifurcation aneurysm, and knowledge of these variations is important during operative planning.
图18：使用简单的直夹（左图）或者成角夹（右图）夹闭ICA分叉部动脉瘤时。	Figure 18: An ICA bifurcation aneurysm was clipped using a simple straight clip (left image) or an angled clip (right image).
成角夹可以避开MCA，其铰链区不会扭结MCA的管腔。	The angled clip may avoid the MCA branch, ensuring that the hinge of the clip does not kink its lumen.
图19：使用弧形瘤夹夹闭指向内侧的ICA分叉部动脉瘤。	Figure 19: Medially-projecting ICA bifurcation aneurysms may be clip ligated using a curved clip.
弧形夹恰好顺应血管分叉处的曲线，有利于观察和减少瘤夹与穿支血管的接触。	The curved clip nicely contours the bifurcation, allowing easy visualization and limited interaction with the perforating vessels.
脉络前动脉必须从瘤颈解离。	The anterior choroidal artery may need to be dissected away from the neck.
图20：也可以使用成角的跨血管夹夹闭内侧指向型的宽颈动脉瘤，瘤夹跨越MCA或由其发出的穿支。	Figure 20: Broad-based medially projecting ICA bifurcation aneurysms may also be occluded via an angled fenestrated clip. The fenestration encases the MCA or any of its perforating arteries.
图21：若术中动脉瘤破裂前M1已被游离，术者可以连同近端A1临时阻断动脉瘤，这时，M1依然保留原来的顺行血流，而A1由前交通复合体逆向灌注，若无法应用棉片辅助夹闭技术处理撕裂的瘤颈，则将临时阻断夹置换为永久夹。	Figure 21: If an intraoperative rupture occurs after the isolation of M1, a temporary clip may be placed to incorporate the aneurysm and the proximal A1. This maneuver will maintain anterograde irrigation of the M1 and retrograde irrigation of the A1 via the anterior communicating artery complex.  The temporary clip may be exchanged with a permanent clip if the neck tear is not amenable to the cotton-clipping technique.
穿支动脉损伤造成丘脑、下丘脑、纹状体和内囊梗塞，导致对侧偏瘫和行为改变等症状，这些并发症往往可以在数月内恢复，取决于梗死灶的具体位置和范围。	Perforator injury often causes thalamic, hypothalamic, striatal, and capsular infarcts, resulting in contralateral hemiplegia and behavior changes. These changes often resolve within months, depending on the exact location and size of the infarct.
即使术中明确没有小穿支的损伤，术后仍偶有梗塞发生，原因可能是夹闭瘤颈后引起的局部血流动力学改变损害了局部血流的质量（而非流量）。	I have occasionally witnessed these infarcts in the absence of any perforator compromise during final intraoperative inspection. The closure of the aneurysm neck may lead to regional hemodynamic changes that compromise the quality, but not the quantity, of flow in these vessels.
脉络前动脉发出的穿支血管供应内囊后肢、丘脑腹后外侧核，闭塞后将分别出现对侧偏瘫和偏身感觉丧失；更少见的是，若其供血范围包括外侧膝状体和视辐射还会导致对侧同向性偏盲。	Injury to the anterior choroidal artery of its perforating vessels often results in contralateral hemiplegia from involvement of the posterior limb of the internal capsule, hemisensory loss from involvement of the ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus, and less frequently, homonymous hemianopsia from involvement of the lateral geniculate body or the geniculocalcarine tract.
Heubner回返动脉滋养同侧尾状核头、内囊前肢与壳核前1/3，该动脉损伤的结局经常是以面部和上肢为主的对侧偏瘫，若是在优势侧大脑半球还会伴有失语。	Injury to the recurrent artery of Heubner often leads to a stroke in the ipsilateral head of the caudate, anterior limb of the internal capsule, and anterior third of the putamen. These infarcts often cause contralateral hemiplegia, predominantly affecting the patient’s face and upper extremities. Dominant infarcts affect speech.
●术后并发症主要与损伤M1、A1和脉络前动脉发出的穿支血管有关。	The most common source of morbidity is any compromise of the M1, A1, and anterior choroidal perforating arteries.
●显微手术治疗ICA分叉部动脉瘤时，动脉瘤减压和锐性分离穿支动脉非常重要。	Aneurysm decompression and sharp perforator dissection are important maneuvers in microsurgery of ICA bifurcation aneurysms.
动静脉畸形切除手术的操作技巧	Nuances in AVM Resection
动静脉畸形（Arteriovenousmalformations, AVMs）常可导致破裂出血，或出现难治性癫痫和局灶性神经功能障碍，是神经外科患者致死致残的一个重要原因。	Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are an important cause of morbidity and mortality among neurosurgical patients, usually due to hemorrhage, but also because of refractory seizures and focal neurologic deficits.
AVMs的治疗选择包括单纯显微外科切除或配合辅助性的栓塞和/或放射外科。	Management options for AVMs vary from microsurgery alone or in conjunction with or without adjunctive embolization and/or radiosurgery.
替代治疗方案是单纯放射外科治疗。	Alternative options include radiosurgery as a standalone option.
大型病变或复杂的病变也许保守观察是最好的选择。	Large and complex lesions may be best managed via observation.
在随后的章节中将讨论切除每种AVM亚型的特定技术细节。	The specific technical nuances for excision of each AVM subtype will be discussed in the following chapters.
本章主要综述所有AVMs的普适原则，在阅读后面章节之前请首先参阅本章。	The current chapter will review the general principles applicable to all AVMs and should be consulted before reviewing the subsequent chapters.
体位摆放	Patient Positioning
正如之前颅脑入路章节所讨论的一样，经过认真计划的患者体位手术过程中可以充分利用重力牵开的方法进行切除病变。	As previously discussed in the Cranial Approaches Volume, thoughtful positioning of the patient during surgery can facilitate resection by allowing the use of gravity retraction.
头位摆放设计需时刻注意颅内静脉回流，使患者头高于心脏水平，颈部轻度过伸，避免头部过度向一侧扭转。	Head position is planned with the cranial venous return in mind, keeping the patient’s head just above the level of the heart, and the neck slightly extended while avoiding extreme rotation of the head to one side.
这些措施可预防颅内静脉高压，否则会使颅脑手术特别是AVM手术中困难重重。	These considerations prevent intracranial venous hypertension, which can be problematic for cranial surgery in general and in AVM surgery in particular.
摆放体位常见的错误包括无法利用颅内的间隙接近病变或者未能最大化利用重力使脑组织下垂减少牵拉。	Common mistakes during patient positioning include failure to use free surfaces to access the lesion and maximize gravity retraction.
因此只能使用固定牵开器，使皮层损伤风险增大，潜在增加了致残率。	As a result, fixed retractors may become necessary, risking cortical injury and potentially increasing morbidity.
由于AVM手术存在术中出血风险及技术挑战，手术视野必须宽阔以提供多种工作角度，适应及时处理皮层下出血情况。	Due to risk of intraoperative bleeding and technical challenges associated with AVM surgery, the operative corridor has to be generous and provide numerous working angles that are flexible for timely handling of subcortical bleeding.
最后，病人体位还应充分考虑手术路径利于早期接近AVM的供血动脉和尽最大可能减少损伤引流静脉。	Finally, patient positioning should take into account operative routes that will minimize any risk to the venous drainage of the AVM and facilitate early access to the feeding vessels.
图1.显示典型的左额AVM手术时头位、切口和骨瓣范围。	Figure 1: Head positioning as well as incision and craniotomy outlines for a typical left frontal AVM is demonstrated.
注意病变周围脑组织的充分暴露。	Note the generous exposure of the peri-lesional brain.
笔者使用神经导航或术中影像导航指引下大范围开颅暴露AVM畸形血管团、供血动脉、引流静脉和AVM周边的正常脑组织，导航基于MRI或更佳的CTA数据实现。	I use neuronavigation or intraoperative image guidance based on magnetic resonance imaging or preferably CTA angiogram data to achieve a wide craniotomy and expose the AVM nidus, its associated feeding arteries and draining veins, and a region of normal brain surrounding the AVM. Craniotomies for AVMs are not minimally invasive and should be generous.
开颅时只要有可能都要计划好暴露且早期开放脑池放出脑脊液使脑组织松弛。	When possible, the craniotomy is planned to provide exposure and early opening of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cisterns to relax the brain.
如果无法放出脑脊液，笔者会放置腰大池引流在开颅时逐渐引流脑脊液使脑组织松弛。	If this is impractical, I install a lumbar drain to gradually drain CSF during the craniotomy to provide brain relaxation.
开颅时颅骨钻孔要多，铣刀在两个骨孔间经过的距离缩短减少扩张的引流静脉损伤的风险，这些扩张的引流静脉可能穿行于矢状窦旁的两层硬膜之间或沿静脉湖走行。	A greater number of burr holes and short passes of the craniotome decrease the risk of injury to dilated draining veins that may be traveling within the parasagittal dural leaves and along the venous lakes.
开颅时铣刀的护板对硬膜的任何一点破坏都可能增加无意损伤AVM引流静脉的风险。	Any violation of the dura during the use of the footplate increases the risk of unintended injury to the draining veins.
这种并发症很难避免，因为两层硬膜间充盈扩张的引流静脉常常扩大压迫在颅骨内板上产生压迹。	The avoidance of this complication can be difficult because the engorged draining veins within the dural leaves are often large enough to erode the inner table of the calvarium.
使用腰大池脑脊液引流可以使硬膜张力下降，铣刀通过时，铣刀护板需将硬膜与颅骨内板完全分离开避免损伤硬膜。	The use of the lumbar CSF drainage can facilitate thorough dissection of the decompressed dura away from the inner surface of the calvarium before the footplate is employed.
图2. 开颅完成后，广泛硬膜剪开暴露脑表面，同时需保护好其下的血管。	Figure 2: Following the craniotomy, a wide durotomy unveils the brain while protecting the underlying vessels.
硬膜和其下方的AVM及相关血管因既往出血的瘢痕可能发生粘连，因此剪开硬膜时要缓慢而且极度小心。	The dura is opened slowly and meticulously because scarring from previous hemorrhage(s) may cause it to be adherent to the underlying AVM or an associated vessel.
在手术的这个阶段撕破引流静脉是灾难性的，会引起大量出血，试图控制出血时很可能闭塞引流静脉。	Tearing of a draining vein this early in the operation can be disastrous because of heavy bleeding and the likelihood of occluding the draining vein while attempting to control the hemorrhage.
切除AVM的大体步骤与技巧	GENERAL STEPS AND NUANCES OF TECHNIQUE FOR AVM RESECTION
显微手术切除每一个AVM过程中都有一些必要的通用步骤。	There are certain universal mandatory steps during microsurgical excision of every AVM.
最好尽可能的遵循这些原则。	It is best to adhere to these principles as much as possible.
手术中违背任何一项原则或颠倒特定的顺序会让笔者颇为担心。	Violating any of these principles or their specific order has caused me many misgivings.
以下是手术需遵循的一般原则，这些原则在每一个AVM亚型的独立章节中有详细阐述。	The following are general principles that will be elaborated upon in the individual chapters of each subtype of AVMs.
第1步：理解畸形血管的三维空间立体结构	Step 1: Thee-Dimensional Understanding of the Malformation
笔者在术前要研究造影和MR图像的每一个序列，形成一个经过深思熟虑的手术策略。	I study every sequence of the preoperative angiogram and MR images and familiarize myself with a well thought-out strategy.
熟记供血动脉的每一根血管以及它们的形态、部位和蜿蜒迂回的路径。	The feedings vessels and their morphology, location, and serpentine routes are memorized.
脑表面的标志、大的引流静脉、既往的栓塞物质都可以用来作为术中定位供血动脉的标记。	The surface landmarks, large draining veins, and embolic material are used as guides to localize feeding arteries.
笔者会描记出包含主要供血动脉那部分AVM特定的边界作为畸形血管团分离和切断的起始点。	I map the specific border of the AVM containing the predominant feeding arteries so the nidal dissection and disconnection begins there.
CTA和MR扫描图像可以用来作为设计与血肿腔有关的分离策略。	CT angiogram scans and MR images are used to plan the dissection strategy in relation to the hematoma cavity.
确定功能区皮层与畸形血管团和血肿的解剖定位关系。	Functional cortices are anatomically mapped in relation to the nidus and the hematoma.
深部脑白质中的供血动脉位置也需要注意到。	The locations of the deep white matter feeders are noted.
笔者更喜欢术中利用CTA图像进行导航，因为CTA中血管与脑表面标志点的解剖关系分辨率更高。	I prefer to use CT angiogram sequences for intraoperative navigation because of its high-resolution vascular anatomy in relation to brain surface landmarks.
AVM破裂出血的部分应最先接近清除血肿后减压使脑张力下降脑组织松弛。	Ruptured border of the AVM is accessed first to decompress the hematoma cavity and relax the brain.
而邻近功能区皮层的AVM边界应在AVM分离的最后阶段进行。	On the other hand, the border of the AVM facing the eloquent cortex is handled last when the AVM is mostly defeated.
图3. 显示一例巨大的右侧颞顶皮层AVM病例。	Figure 3: A large right-sided temporoparietal convexity AVM is demonstrated.
沿着病变前极的大脑中动脉分支是主要的供血动脉，应该被最先离断。	The MCA branches along the anterior pole of the lesion are the primary feeders and should be disconnected first.
AVM内既往的栓塞物质标记出了AVM的上缘和前缘（颈内动脉动脉期造影侧位像—上排左侧图像）。	The embolic materials mark the superior and the anterior borders of the AVM (lateral ICA arteriogram-left upper image).
主要的引流静脉向上后方走行。	The primary vein is travelling supraposteriorly.
MR图像（上排右侧图像）可以明确邻近病变的功能区皮层和脑室区域，并且可定位深部脑白质中的供血动脉于侧脑室三角区。	The MR image (right upper) discloses the vicinity of the lesion to the functional cortices and ventricular chambers, and locates the deep white matter feeders to the trigone.
CTA图像（下排图像）为术中计划提供了与脑实质和颅骨血管相关的血管（包括深部引流静脉）解剖结构。	CT angiogram sequences (lower images) provide information regarding the vascular anatomy (including the deep draining vein) in relation to the parenchyma and skull landmarks for intraoperative planning.
图4. 示意图显示的是皮层AVM的一般血管构筑。	Figure 4: The general angioarchitecture of a convexity AVM is illustrated.
供血血管上的动脉瘤应与畸形血管团内的动脉瘤相区别。	Feeding vessel aneurysms should be distinguished from nidal aneurysms.
大的供血动脉埋藏在AVM旁的脑沟中，需要分离蛛网膜后才能显露。	Large feeding arteries hide within the peri-AVM sulci and require patient arachnoid dissection for their exposure.
主要的引流静脉可以包裹遮挡AVM的深部脑实质内的部分，应该在分离AVM的过程中细心加以保护。	The primary draining vein can wrap around the deeper parenchymal sections of the AVM and should be carefully protected during AVM disconnection.
不加区分就电凝畸形血管团和引流静脉要严加禁止。	Indiscriminate coagulation of the nidus and the vein is prohibited.
脑白质内部的供血动脉由于控制困难且血管缺乏肌层处理起来非常挑战。	White matter feeders provide the most challenge for their control and lack robust muscular walls.
第2步：全面暴露，准备“战斗”	Step 2: Generous Exposure and Preparing for the Battle
术前笔者会通过摆放适当的患者体位来设计灵活的工作角度。	I plan flexible working angles via appropriate patient positioning.
术中则使用吸引器动态牵拉而非固定牵开器来保护重要的正常解剖结构，利用重力使脑组织下垂并且大范围蛛网膜松解使动态牵拉成为可能。	Gravity retraction and wide arachnoid dissection allow dynamic retraction using the suction device to protect vital normal anatomy against fixed retractor blades.
开颅不应该遵循微创，而是大骨瓣开颅以暴露每一根供血动脉和所有的引流静脉。	The craniotomy should not be minimally invasive, but generous to expose every arterial feeder and all the draining veins.
硬膜广泛剪开以便辨认AVM周边的正常结构。	The dura should be opened widely so that normal structures surrounding the AVM can be identified.
笔者不会根据脑血管造影上显示的AVM畸形血管团大小来决定开颅范围。	I do not plan the size of the craniotomy according to the size of the angiographic nidus of the AVM.
在分离脑白质深部的供血动脉（如豆纹动脉）时笔者会特别注意解剖平面，因为这些血管可以引起无法控制的快速大量出血。	I do pay special attention to the dissection planes where deep white matter feeders (i.e., lenticulostriate arteries) can lead to uncontrolled torrential bleeding.
在准备切断脑白质深部的供血动脉时笔者会确保有足够的空间和舒适的工作角度来处理可能出现的困难时刻。	I assure myself adequate space and ergonomic working angles to handle the tough moments during disconnection of the deep white matter feeders.
第3步：处理供血动脉	Step 3: Managing the Feeding Arteries
笔者会开放脑表面的沟裂来辨认供血动脉，但不会触碰静脉。	I open the fissures and sulci to identify the feeding arteries but leave the veins alone.
图5. 在暴露供血动脉和松解蛛网膜的时候术者一定要耐心（上部示意图）。	Figure 5: Patience of the surgeon is a virtue during exposure of feeding vessels and subarachnoid dissection (upper illustration).
AVM表面的蛛网膜系带常常增厚。	The arachnoid bands over the AVM are commonly thickened.
笔者喜欢使用尖镊子夹住蛛网膜系带边缘，轻轻的撕开增厚的表层蛛网膜显露皮层供血血管（下部术中照片）。	I favor the use of jewelers’ forceps for grabbing the edges of the arachnoid bands and gently tearing the thickened superficial arachnoid layers to unveil the cortical feeding vessels (lower intraoperative photo).
偶尔由于动脉化静脉的流量很高，不可能清楚的鉴别动脉和静脉，	Occasionally it is impossible to differentiate clearly between an artery and a vein because of high flow arterialization of the vein.
在AVM分离切除的最后阶段时动脉化的静脉颜色转蓝时动脉和静脉才可能变得容易区分。	This distinction may become more apparent at the end stages of AVM dissection and excision when the arterialized veins turn blue and demonstrate their true identity.
手术开始初期清楚的理解静脉或动脉的特点对于手术计划和切除非常重要，笔者会尝试用镊子轻轻夹住血管或用动脉瘤临时阻断夹夹闭血管（临时阻断试验），这个简短的阻断试验可以来区别供血动脉和引流静脉。	If an early and clear understanding of the character of a vein or an artery is important for operative planning and its disconnection, I attempt a brief trial occlusion of the feeding artery or draining vein by gently squeezing the vessel using a pair of forceps or a temporary aneurysm clip (the “temporary occlusion” test).
如果AVM出现膨胀，那么阻断的血管一定是一根重要的引流静脉，这根血管必须在AVM分离完成前保持完整。	If engorgement of the AVM occurs, the occluded vessel is certainly an important draining vein and should be kept intact until the end of AVM disconnection.
术中荧光造影对于显示血管充盈时间和特征也很有效。	Intraoperative fluorescence angiography can also be effective in demonstrating the timing of flow and the character of the vessel.
脑深部病变在脑表面可以没有任何表现，不过脑皮层的一根引流静脉可能指引着通往深部病变的途径，而其他皮层下的AVM需要寻找更为细微的皮层表面的线索，比如细小的动脉化静脉或者轻度扩张的供血动脉，追踪这些线索可以深入脑沟中最终发现AVM的畸形血管团。	A draining vein at the surface may herald the path to a deep lesion without any surface presentation, whereas other subcortical AVMs require detection of more subtle surface cues such as small arterialized veins or mildly dilated arterial feeders, either of which can be traced down to a sulcus and ultimately to the AVM nidus.
图6. 中等粗细以下的皮层和软膜供血动脉（小动脉）可以迅速有效的电凝住然后剪断，不必有太多顾虑电凝不足或出现像脑白质深部供血血管一样无法控制的出血，在处理这些有比较厚实血管壁的小动脉的时候不需减慢分离速度。	Figure 6: The small and medium sized cortical and pial feeding arteries (arterioles) coagulate readily and should be efficiently handled without any major concern for their lack of bipolar coagulation and uncontrollable bleeding as seen with the deep white matter feeders. There is no reason not to markedly speed up the dissection process when it comes to manipulating these feeding arterioles that own robust walls.
图7. 术者不应该过度担心牺牲掉皮层和软膜表面的过路血管。	Figure 7: The surgeon should not overzealously sacrifice en passage vessels along their cortical and pial surfaces.
显微血管夹夹闭进入畸形血管团部位的大的终末供血动脉使其塌陷，有利于电凝闭塞这些血管。	Microclips are useful to collapse large terminal feeding arteries before their coagulation where they enter the nidus.
这些粗大动脉的血管壁较厚有时单纯双极电凝很难将其闭塞。	These large diameter arteries have thickened walls and occasionally may not readily respond to or collapse with bipolar electrocautery alone.
图8. 供应畸形血管团的大、小动脉呈螺旋状、形态异常并且膨胀（绿色箭头），与邻近脑组织的正常供血血管有明显差别。	Figure 8: The feeding arterioles and arteries are “corkscrew,” dysmorphic, and at times distended (green arrow), as compared with normal suppliers to the adjacent brain.
这些形态差异可以帮助术者鉴别AVM供血动脉和过路血管分支（红色箭头）。	These configuration differences can help the operator differentiate AVM feeding vessels from branches of the en passage vessels (red arrow).
图9. 与皮层小动脉相比，细小的脑白质深部的供血动脉缺乏弹力组织和平滑肌层，因此电凝后不能有效收缩闭塞（上排图片），这些血管可能缩回到脑白质内持续活动性出血，可能引起AVM周围远隔区域的脑内血肿。	Figure 9: In contrast to cortical arterioles, the small caliber deep white matter feeders have little elastic tissue and smooth muscle layers, and therefore do not constrict upon bipolar coagulation (upper images).
脑白质深部的供血动脉必须通过快速清除血管周围少量脑组织追踪游离出来（下排左侧图片），在这些血管远离畸形血管团一侧的近心端相对正常的血管壁上电凝或用血管夹夹闭（下排右侧图片）。	They may continue to bleed vigorously, retract into the white matter and cause intracerebral hemorrhage in an area of the brain away from the AVM. Deep white matter feeders must be pursued and isolated via removal of a small amount of white matter immediately around them (left lower image) so that their more proximal segment with relatively normal walls, away from the nidus, is preferably coagulated or clip ligated (right lower image).
这种操作对于避免AVM手术中不必要的并发症非常重要。	This maneuver is critical for avoiding unnecessary morbidity associated with AVM surgery.
在出血部位填塞止血材料不会达到止血目的，只会给术者安全的假象，会由于远隔部位脑内血肿出现脑肿胀。	Packing the bleeding site with hemostatic materials will not attain hemostasis, only provides the surgeon with a false sense of security, and leads to brain swelling because of remote intracerebral hematomas.
图10.尽可能少利用显微夹来处理大的皮层供血动脉和小的白质供血动脉，因为他们可能在不经意之间脱落（造成大量出血）。	Figure 10: The use of microclips for the larger cortical feeding vessels and small white matter feeders should be minimized as much as possible as the clips can be inadvertently dislodged.
如图所示，显微夹也阻挡了进一步分离的视野。	As demonstrated, their bulk interferes with the next operative maneuvers.
用双极电凝处理大脑白质的供血动脉是最实用的方法，实在无法控制出血时，再考虑用显微夹。	Bipolar coagulation of the white matter feeders is the most practical method to control their bleeding, however; clips should be used if bleeding continues.
放疗可以使血管壁薄弱的脑白质深部供血动脉转变成容易电凝的血管。	Radiosurgery transforms delicate-walled white matter feeders to readily coagulable vessels.
放射线诱导的脑白质胶质增生变化也可以为白质内细小血管的变厚的血管壁提供线索。	The gliotic white matter changes that are induced by radiation provide a clue regarding thickening of the wall of the fine white matter vessels.
第4步： 畸形血管团周边策略性分离	Step 4: Strategic Circumdissection
术中应该沿着血管团的周边以环形或螺旋形方式进行分离以暴露AVM的每一面直到其尖端，AVM的尖端通常位于靠近脑室室管膜的部位。	Dissection should proceed in a circumferential or spiral-like fashion to expose every aspect of the AVM toward its apex, which is often located near the ventricular ependyma.
笔者在术中采用基于CTA的导航系统来指引切开表浅的软脑膜、引导分离脑白质深部不清晰的畸形血管团边界。	I use intraoperative navigation based on CTA for guiding the superficial pial incisions and deep white matter dissection where the nidus margins are not very clear.
图11.笔者利用脑的自然沟裂，通过这些平面加快环形分离。	Figure 11: I use the natural fissures and sulci and promote circumdissection through these planes.
术者在分离过程中不应深浅不一，否则会出现难以控制的出血。	The surgeon should not work through uneven planes and deep holes as unexpected bleeding will be difficult to control.
有时供血动脉离开脑沟走形，这时就需要通过软膜下平面或进入临近脑回中进行解剖分离。	Occasionally the feeding artery leaves the sulci, and I must dissect through subpial planes or enter the adjacent gyrus.
一定要绝对避免进入畸形血管团内部。	Entry into the nidus is strictly avoided.
每一个AVM都有其独特的血管构筑和边界。	Each AVM has its own individual angioarchitecture and borders.
显微解剖分离的策略包括：①蛛网膜下/软脑膜解剖；②脑实质解剖；③室管膜处解剖；④检查确保完全离断畸形血管团，最后阻断主要的引流静脉；⑤取出AVM。	The strategic steps for microdissection include: 1) subarachnoid/pial dissection, 2) parenchymal dissection, 3) ependymal dissection, 4) inspection to ensure complete nidus disconnection, and finally primary vein sacrifice, leading to 5) AVM removal.
图12. AVM切除的基本步骤。脑表面看不到AVM，只有一根无法明确是供血动脉还是引流静脉可疑血管（左上图，箭头）；软膜切开（右上图）；蛛网膜下分离发现一根过路动脉（左中图，箭头）；脑实质切断暴露畸形血管团边界（右中图，箭头）；皮层血管的性质仍未确定（蓝色箭头），但被仔细保护好；既往栓塞过的血管被找到可以帮助确定脑白质的解剖分离（左下图）；AVM被完整的离断后切断细小的引流静脉。最初的皮层血管（左上图，红色箭头）最后确认为一根过路动脉而被保留（右下图）。	Figure 12: The basic steps in AVM resection are demonstrated.  The AVM was only apparent on the surface based on a questionable feeding artery versus draining vein leading to the subcortical AVM (upper left image-arrow).  Pial dissection was performed (upper right photo).  Subarachnoid dissection revealed an en passage artery (middle left image-arrow). Parenchymal disconnection exposed the borders of the nidus (middle right photo-arrows); the identity of the cortical vessel (blue arrow) is still unknown, however, it is carefully preserved.   Embolized vessels were found and assisted with white matter dissection (lower left photo).  The small draining veins were sacrificed after complete AVM disconnection.  The initial cortical vessel (upper left image-red arrow) was finally identified as an en passage artery that was spared (lower right image).
笔者不会在完整离断畸形血管团之前对其进行任何电凝，	I avoid any coagulation of the nidus before its complete disconnection.
如果笔者不经意间过于靠近突向脑内的畸形血管团的结节状突起部位，使畸形血管团血管壁有破损出血，笔者会用一块非常小的沾了凝血酶的棉片塞入破损处止血，	If a bleeding defect in the nidus wall is apparent as I inadvertently wander too near the nidus lobules that project into the brain, I place a very small piece of thrombin-soaked cotton to plug the defect.
耐心的轻轻压迫会将破损出血处封闭。	Gentle tamponade and patience will seal the defect.
大范围电凝畸形血管团会使其内部的血流动力学和管腔内的流动模式发生急剧改变，引起破裂出血和脑肿胀。	Aggressive coagulation of the nidus will acutely alter its internal hemodynamics and intraluminal flow pattern, leading to its rupture and brain swelling.
第5步：保护主要的静脉	Step 5: Protecting the Dominant Vein
表浅静脉是非常好的标志物，可以将术前脑血管造影转化到术野中来。	The veins are great superficial landmarks to transpose and navigate the preoperative angiographic findings onto the operative field.
主要的引流静脉（有时有多根主要引流静脉）应该保留至手术的最后再处理。	The main draining vein (sometimes multiple main draining veins) should be the last part of the operation.
切断了畸形血管团所有的供血动脉之前要保护好这些静脉。	These veins should be preserved until the entire nidus is disconnected from all of its feeding arteries.
在AVM的供血动脉都切断后，静脉颜色变为暗红。	After the AVM disconnection, the veins become darker.
如果颜色没有变化或者临时阻断静脉后出现畸形血管团肿胀，术者应继续寻找隐藏的残余动脉，通常位于静脉附近或静脉下方。	If this change does not occur or if temporary clipping of the vein leads to nidus swelling, the surgeon should search for hidden, residual feeders, usually located near and underneath the vein(s).
如果在大的供血动脉切断之前不慎撕破了主要的引流静脉，笔者不会闭掉静脉，因为这么做会引起AVM突然破裂，脑组织随即肿胀。	If I inadvertently tear a main draining vein before large feeding arteries are encountered and sacrificed, I do not occlude the vein, because this maneuver will lead to sudden AVM rupture and immediate brain swelling.
笔者暂时不处理静脉，任其出血，同时快速找到畸形血管团的供血动脉并切断。	I allow the vein to bleed while I efficiently find the feeding arteries at the nidus and disconnect them.
这时的手术类似突击作战，术者必须保持冷静、决断和自制。	A “commando” operation is necessary at this point, and the surgeon must remain calm, decisive, and in control.
术中成功化解这种危及生命的危机是每一位AVM术者成熟的必经之路。	Successful performance of this critical and life-threatening step is required for the maturation of every AVM surgeon.
静脉有主次之分，	There are primary veins and secondary veins.
笔者会根据术前的造影图像标记出主要的引流静脉，其特点是血管直径最大，引流最多的血流。	I designate the primary vein preoperatively based on the angiographic findings of the vessel that has the largest diameter and carries the most flow out of the AVM.
术中只要按照环形分离程序有效的减少畸形血管团的供血，次要静脉在完整离断AVM供血之前可以牺牲掉。	The secondary veins may be sacrificed before complete AVM disconnection as long as the flow into the nidus has been sufficiently reduced through stepwise circumferential dissection.
切断一些次要静脉对于牵拉AVM和离断深部隐藏的供血动脉常常是必须的。	The exclusion of some of the secondary veins is often necessary for me to mobilize the AVM and disconnect deep and hidden feeding arteries.
图13. 在主要或次要静脉切断前必须进行临时阻断试验。	Figure 13: The “temporary occlusion” test is necessary before the primary or secondary veins are transected.
如果临时阻断静脉后AVM肿胀，在切断静脉之前必须再去寻找并切断供血动脉。	If AVM swelling is encountered upon temporary vein occlusion, additional devascularization of the nidus is necessary before venous sacrifice.
主要的引流静脉可能在向皮层走行时缠绕在畸形血管团的深部，术者在分离脑实质提供空间的阶段一定不要尝试电凝静脉，理想情况是，深部静脉部分的任何出血使用棉片轻轻压迫控制出血，不加分辨的大量电凝只会引起更多出血和破裂风险。	The primary vein may wrap around the deeper sections of the nidus before the vein reaches the surface. One must avoid the temptation to coagulate the vein during the parenchymal steps of dissection to create more space. Ideally, any bleeding from the deeper portions of the vein should be covered with a piece of cotton and controlled with gentle tamponade; aggressive indiscriminate cautery leads to more bleeding and risks a rupture.
第6步：有效切除AVM	Step 6: Efficient Excision of the AVM
笔者把AVM切除的最后步骤比作在恶劣天气条件下降落一架飞机，	I analogize the final steps in AVM removal to landing a plane under turbulent weather conditions.
不能因惧怕风暴而不敢降落。	One cannot fear the storm and avoid landing.
大型AVM分离的最后阶段在畸形血管团及其周围的脑组织断面上有出血，	The final steps of dissection for large AVMs often involve some bleeding from the resection bed and the nidus.
术者必须保持理智，时刻铭记及时切除AVM是控制出血的最好办法。	The surgeon must remain in control and remember that timely removal of the AVM is the best method to control the bleeding.
虽然在靠近脑室旁的区域造影检查没有明确的异常血管，但靠近室管膜的AVM会有室管膜和脉络丛的血管参与供血，因此为了避免脑室旁的AVM部分术后复发，尤其在儿童患者中，笔者会扩大切除范围直至侧脑室边，离断室管膜/脉络丛的供血血管。	AVMs that are near the ependyma incorporate ependymal and plexal feeding vessels, despite nonremarkable angiographic findings near the periventricular region. Therefore, to avoid recurrence of AVMs with periventricular components, especially in pediatric patients, I extend the circumdissection to the level of the ventricle and disconnect the ependymal/plexal feeding vessels.
不幸的是在有些病例中笔者会吃惊的发现当笔者试图切断位于深部的“静脉”时，笔者实际上只是离断了AVM畸形血管团的内侧部分，因此切除完毕后仔细检查侧脑室壁可以避免发生类似错误，杜绝迟发出血或远期出血的风险以及避免AVM复发。	I have unfortunately been surprised in a number of cases when I attempted to disconnect a “vein” at the depth of resection cavity when actually I truncated a deep section of the AVM nidus. Careful inspection of the ventricular wall can avoid these errors and the delayed/future risk of hemorrhage or AVM recurrence.
脉络膜动脉使用双极可以很容易控制，如果这些血管藏在AVM畸形血管团后面难以直视时，也可以使用血管夹夹闭。	Choroidal arteries are more easily controlled using bipolar electrocautery, although if these vessels are difficult to visualize behind the AVM nidus, clips can be applied.
如果某根脉络膜供血动脉在电凝时回缩，撕破并脱离视野，可以导致无法辨识的脑室内出血，招致脑疝风险。	If a choroidal feeding artery retracts on coagulation, avulses and gets away, it can cause unrecognized bleeding into the ventricle, risking brain herniation.
室管膜动脉可以是AVM的主要供血来源，因此，手术进行到这个步骤时发生意外脑疝术者应该警醒去检查脑室清除血块并细致的处理室管膜供血动脉的出血。	The ependymal arteries can be a significant source of feeding vessels to the AVM.  Therefore, unexpected brain herniation at this step of the operation should alert the operator to examine the ventricle to evacuate the blood and deal meticulously with the bleeding ependymal feeding vessels.
笔者时常惊异于术中发现一些重要的供血动脉藏于主要引流静脉旁，	I have also been surprised by the presence of functionally significant feeding arteries that reside next to a primary draining vein.
因为笔者会极度小心避免损伤静脉，常常会疏漏这些隐藏的供血动脉，只要仍然有动脉供血，静脉就无法变蓝。	My compulsive actions to protect the vein often leaves these feeding vessels unnoticed and prevents the vein from turning blue.
因此，如果除了主要引流静脉AVM的其余部分被完整解剖分离后，静脉仍然保持红色，应该在靠近静脉近心端去寻找并切断隐藏的供血动脉。	Therefore, if the entire AVM is disconnected except the primary draining vein, but the vein is still red, a hidden feeding artery in close proximity of the vein should be sought and severed.
图14. 最后，夹闭、电凝然后切断静脉，	Figure 14: Finally, the veins are clipped, coagulated and transected.
仔细检查畸形血管团切除后的创面是否可能存在畸形血管团残余。	The resection bed should be meticulously inspected for possible residue of the nidus.
注意在畸形血管团切除后创面的右侧保留了完整的过路动脉。	Note the preservation of the en passage artery on the right side of the resection cavity.
笔者认为大多数中等到大型AVM术中必须使用造影来确保完整阻断动静脉瘘。流量较小的动静脉分流在远离畸形血管团的部位导致不明显的过度灌注，在儿童患者中尤其多见，这些血管术中不值得过分去追踪，而应该长期随访监测。	In my opinion, intraoperative angiography is mandatory to ensure complete obliteration of arteriovenous shunting in most medium to large size AVMs. Subtle “luxury perfusion” associated with minor arteriovenous shunting, away from the nidus, especially in the pediatric patients, does not warrant an aggressive pursuit and should be monitored long-term.
术中造影确认AVM完整切除之后，严密止血，	Following angiographic confirmation of AVM removal, complete hemostasis is secured.
升高患者平均动脉压达到基线水平之上15-20mmHg并且维持10-15分钟观察是否有出血。	The patient’s mean arterial pressure should be raised up to 15-20 mm/hg above the baseline level and maintained for 10 to 15 minutes.
任何怀疑与残余AVM畸形血管团有关的出血都高度预示术后可能出现血肿。	Any bleeding is suspicious for residual AVM nidus and indicates a high risk of postoperative hematoma development.
彻底止血的唯一方法就是切除残余的AVM。	The only method to achieve hemostasis is to remove the residual AVM.
应尽量减少电凝周围脆弱的脑白质，因为会导致更多的出血，应该耐心地反复多次冲洗创面达到严密止血。	Coagulation of the friable white matter is minimized, as this maneuver will lead to more bleeding. Multiple rounds of irrigation fluid and patience are needed to achieve meticulous hemostasis.
手术后24小时患者的收缩压应维持在稍低于（10-20%）基线的水平，根据术后第一天复查CT的结果决定是否缓慢升高血压水平。	At the end of surgery, the patient’s systolic blood pressure should be maintained slightly (10-20%) below the baseline levels for 24 hours following the operation. The results of the CT scan on the first postoperative day determine if the blood pressure parameters can be slowly liberalized.
下面这些图像进一步总结笔者在AVM切除术中的技术。	The following images further summarize my techniques for AVM removal.
通过该例左侧额底AVM阐述相关的技术细节。	This left-sided basal frontal AVM illustrates the relevant details.
图15. 展示左侧额底AVM切除的技术细节（第一行和第二行），	Figure 15: The technical nuances for resection of a left basal frontal AVM is demonstrated (first two rows).
注意眶顶上方的骨窗部分可以提供足够的自下向上的手术角度，无需过度牵拉额叶（第三行）。	Note the osteotomy over the orbital roof to provide an adequate inferior-to-superior operative trajectory without excessive frontal lobe retraction (third row).
外侧裂前方蛛网膜下的解剖分离可以切断来自大脑中动脉的主要供血动脉，	Subarachnoid dissection, anterior to the Sylvian fissure, allowed disconnection of predominant AVM feeders from the MCA.
一支主要的供血动脉（红色箭头）紧邻引流静脉（紫色箭头）隐藏。	A prominent feeding artery (red arrow), as expected, hid next to the draining vein(s)(purple arrow).
畸形血管团四周游离（第四行），	The nidus was skeletonized (fourth row).
引流静脉需保存完好，但可以推移以提供空间处理AVM的深部部分。	The draining vein was preserved but mobilized to provide access to the deep portions of the AVM.
之后，搜寻深部白质内的供血动脉并离断（第五行）。	Next, the deep white matter feeders were found and sacrificed (fifth row).
临时阻断主要的引流静脉确认AVM已经完全游离，	Temporary occlusion of the primary draining vein revealed adequate AVM disconnection.
然后取出AVM，所有皮层的静脉应该转为深蓝色（最后一行）。	The AVM was removed and all the cortical veins were noted to turn dark blue (bottom row).
患者术后转入ICU密切观察是否存在术后出血的证据。	The patient is admitted to the intensive care unit after surgery and is closely observed for evidence of postoperative bleeding.
对于困难病例、巨大AVM、术中脑肿胀或任何怀疑可能术后出血的病例，患者要保留气管插管、给予镇静过夜以避免拔除气管插管时呛咳伴随的血压剧增。	After difficult cases, large AVMs, presence of intraoperative swelling, or any case that causes concern for postoperative hemorrhage, the patient remains intubated and sedated overnight to prevent the blood pressure spikes that often accompany coughing and gagging during extubation.
术后第一天复查CT和CTA，	A CT scan and angiogram is obtained on the first postoperative day.
一旦发现AVM残余征象，要立即再次手术或待患者安全时再次手术。	If any AVM remnant is demonstrated, the patient is returned for a reoperation immediately or as soon as the patient is deemed safe to return to surgery.
儿童AVM以其易复发而知名，复发的部分原因是由于畸形血管团较松散，术后需要多年影像跟踪随访。	Pediatric AVMs are notorious for their recurrence, partly due to their noncompact nidus, and must undergo surveillance imaging for years after surgery.
AVM无论手术切除还是栓塞均可出现很多并发症，包括因过于激进的扩大切除或缺血性梗塞导致的神经功能障碍、癫痫、脑积水和感染等。但是，术中破裂出血、术后出血和术后水肿是三个需特殊关注的并发症。	Resection or embolization of AVMs can be marred by many complications, including neurologic deficits from overly aggressive dissection or ischemic infarcts, seizures, hydrocephalus, and infection; however, 3 complications deserving specific consideration are intraoperative rupture, postoperative hemorrhage, and postoperative edema.
术中AVM破裂是早期阻断一支或多支主要引流静脉后引发的一种潜在灾难性后果，	Intraoperative AVM rupture is a potentially disastrous consequence of premature occlusion of one or more major draining veins.
这种情况常常发生在损伤引流静脉后试图止血时或固定牵开器牵拉畸形血管团使静脉扭结时，	This event often occurs during attempts to regain hemostasis after the draining vein is injured or by kinking of the vein while the nidus is held under fixed retraction.
也可见于试图栓塞高流量动静脉瘘时。	This can also occur during attempted embolization of high-flow fistulas.
这些不幸的时刻最可能发生于大量出血迫于压力需要快速决策的情况下，因此要强调在解剖分离病变的整个过程中保持止血的重要性。	All of these unfortunate moments are more likely to occur in the event of heavy bleeding and pressured decision-making, underscoring the importance of maintaining hemostasis throughout the dissection process.
更多细节请参考后续章节：术中破裂和并发症处理（Intraoperative Rupture and Complication Management）。	For further details, please refer to the Chapter on Intraoperative Rupture and Complication Management.
残余的AVM畸形血管团可引起邻近正常脑组织内出血或术中脑肿胀。	Residual AVM nidus can lead to bleeding within the adjacent normal brain and intraoperative brain swelling.
一旦AVM流出道的主要部分受损，即会出现畸形血管团肿胀，供血动脉充盈怒张，电凝无法止血，畸形血管团区域和脑组织开始自发出血。	Once a significant portion of the AVM outflow has been compromised, the nidus swells, arterial feeders engorge and become less responsive to coagulation, and areas of the nidus and brain begin to spontaneously bleed.
此时，不能再进行仔细、按部就班的解剖分离，随后的操作笔者称之为“突击切除”（点击进入相关链接）。	At this point, careful, methodical dissection is no longer an option, and an operation ensues that I refer to as the “commando resection. ”
迫在眉睫的AVM破裂迫使术者实施果断、审慎、有目的性的牵开畸形血管团的动作，电凝尚存较大的供血动脉，在移除畸形血管团开始时AVM基底附近小的供血动脉可不予理会，畸形血管团一旦移走，立即快速检查残腔中的活动出血并止血。	The impending AVM rupture necessitates thoughtful, decisive, and deliberately aggressive mobilization of the nidus and coagulation of the remaining larger arterial feeders. Smaller feeders near the base of the AVM are initially ignored as the nidus is removed. Next, with the nidus out of the way, the cavity is rapidly examined for active bleeders and hemostasis is re-established.
该技术常常需要深入脑白质暴露出这些细小脆弱的深部穿支血管的一小段以便夹闭。	This technique often requires dissecting into the white matter to expose a length of these small, friable, deep perforating vessels, followed by their clip ligation.
由于“突击切除”增加过度损伤的风险，显然不是理想的策略，但当遇到需预防AVM破裂和可能出现灾难性脑疝和失血的情况时是绝对必要的措施。	Because of its increased risk of morbidity, the commando resection is clearly not ideal, but it is essential under these circumstances to prevent rupture of the AVM and potentially catastrophic brain herniation and blood loss.
严重脑水肿和出血是大型高流量AVM切除或栓塞后最常发生的两个术后并发症。这些并发症确切的原因尚不清楚，很可能源于AVM处理后的血流动力学变化。	Severe edema and hemorrhage are the two postoperative complications that occur most often after resection or embolization of large and high-flow AVMs. The exact etiology of these complications remains unclear, but is most likely a result of altered hemodynamics in the wake of AVM manipulation.
针对这种现象已提出了两种解释，“正常灌注压突破”理论断定AVM周围的小动脉长期处于低灌注压状态，呈最大扩张，AVM切除后这些小动脉无法立即自动调节适应正常灌注压，引起周围脑组织内水肿和出血。第二种解释认为静脉流出道阻断后，畸形血管团残腔周围组织内动脉输入瘀滞导致水肿、低灌注、缺血和出血。	Two explanations have been proposed. The phenomena of “normal perfusion pressure breakthrough,” asserts that the arterioles surrounding an AVM are usually exposed to low perfusion pressures and are maximally vasodilated. As a result, these arterioles are unable to immediately autoregulate upon restoration of normal perfusion pressures following AVM resection. This alternation leads to edema and hemorrhage within the surrounding brain. The second explanation suggests that obstruction of venous outflow and stagnant arterial input within the tissues surrounding the resection cavity cause edema, hypoperfusion, ischemia, and hemorrhage.
无论原因如何，这些并发症在切除有高流量动静脉分流的较大的AVM后最常出现，因此应该采取有效措施控制术后血压。	Regardless of the cause, these complications are more common during resection of larger AVMs associated with high-flow shunting; and therefore appropriate measures for postoperative blood pressure control should be taken.
在手术切除AVM前逐步栓塞部分AVM允许周围脑组织适应突然切除AVM后的血流动力学改变，可以最大程度减少或避免这些不良事件发生。	These adverse effects can also be minimized or avoided by gradual embolization of portions of the AVM before surgery to allow the surrounding brain to accommodate to the hemodynamic changes that ensue after sudden AVM resection.
采取分期处理的方式应对血流动力学改变可减少这些术后并发症的发生率。	Managing the altered hemodynamics in this staged manner decreases the incidence of these postoperative complications.
如果即便细心调控血压，术后仍然发生水肿和出血，可以采用高张药物治疗，必要时可行脑室造瘘引流脑脊液降低颅内压力。	If edema or hemorrhage develops postoperatively despite meticulous blood pressure control, it can be managed medically with hypertonic therapies or, if necessary, a ventriculostomy to drain cerebrospinal fluid and decrease intracranial pressure.
少见情况下需手术清除颅内血肿或去骨瓣减压。	Rarely, operative evacuation of the hematoma or decompressive craniectomy is mandatory;
为了明确是否有残留畸形血管团术中要仔细检查手术残腔或行脑血管造影。	the resection cavity should be examined with an angiogram or intraoperatively for residual nidus.
笔者认为对于破裂出血且神经功能良好的AVM患者手术应该在出血急性期进行，患者可以同时自出血引起的暂时障碍和手术打击中恢复。	I believe surgery should be conducted during the acute phase of hemorrhage on patients who present with a ruptured AVM and are in good neurological condition. This allows the patient to recover from the temporary consequences of the hemorrhage and the surgery simultaneously.
急性期出血提供了一个不错的解剖分离平面，而既往出血引起的慢性胶质增生则处理起来更具有挑战性。	An acute hemorrhage provides reasonable dissection planes, but chronic gliosis from a previous hemorrhage can potentially be more challenging to deal with.
另外，急性期清除血块和AVM通常可以从脑内出血的占位效应中更快恢复。	Furthermore, acute evacuation of the clot and AVM often facilitates faster recovery from the mass effect of the intracerebral hemorrhage.
但是，AVM破裂引起的急性脑水肿造成神经功能下降时，则要延迟手术，	However, acute cerebral edema, as a result of AVM rupture, causing neurological decline, requires delayed surgical care.
因为水肿的脑组织很脆弱，手术操作损伤大。	Edematous brain is friable and vulnerable to injurious operative maneuvers.
在解剖分离AVM的脑实质内部分时，对脑白质内AVM的供血动脉的出血点进行压迫止血几乎不能奏效，会因为隐藏出血或远隔部位的脑内出血引起脑张力增高。	Packing the bleeding points from the AVM’s white matter feeders during the parenchymal phase of dissection almost never works and leads to increased brain tension because of occult or remote foci of intracerebral hemorrhage.
笔者的建议是立即耐心的处理出血点。	I recommend addressing the bleeding source immediately and managing it patiently.
放任一处出血不管，却因操作造成另一处出血转移注意力是不明智的。	It is not advisable to leave one bleeding site and cause bleeding at another site by diverting attention elsewhere.
AVM切除后周围血管网络的血流动力学发生改变，这些变化可使供血动脉上的动脉瘤逐渐缩小，	Removal of the AVM will lead to hemodynamic alternations in the surrounding vascular territories; these alterations lead to gradual regression of feeding vessel aneurysms.
因此，术中无法达到的动脉瘤可不处理，而专心切除AVM。	Therefore, difficult-to-reach aneurysms are left alone and the attention is directed to the excision of the AVM.
但是在显微手术切除外侧裂周围AVM时，笔者会尝试夹闭易于达到的动脉瘤（大脑中动脉分叉处）。	However, I attempt clip ligation of the more accessible aneurysms (MCA bifurcation) during microsurgical removal of the peri-Sylvian AVMs.
儿童AVM是异于成人AVM的病变。	Pediatric AVMs are a different entity than those of adults.
儿童AVM通常不成熟且部分松散，即便在术前造影的影像上也很难辨认确切的边界。	They are frequently immature and partly diffuse AVMs whose definite borders are not easily identifiable, even on a preoperative angiogram.
即使动脉造影证实全部切除，这些弥散的病灶仍存在潜在复发的风险。	These diffuse lesions have a substantial risk of recurrence, even after their angiographically-proven gross total resection.
笔者曾多次遇到儿童AVM术中造影证实病灶全切，但术后造影提示一小支新出现的早期引流静脉的病例，有时异常血管离病变切除的残腔尚有一段距离。	I have faced multiple instances when the post-resection intraoperative angiogram confirmed gross total resection of a pediatric AVM, but the postoperative angiogram revealed a newly identified small early draining vein, sometimes slightly remote from the resection cavity.
这些细小的动静脉瘘自然变化史尚不清楚，因此过度找寻它们也许并不必要。	An aggressive approach to these “minor” arteriovenous shunts may not be warranted, even though their natural history is not clearly defined.
AVM的手术把我们中最好的医师定义为显微神经外科医师。	AVM surgery defines the best of us as microneurosurgeons.
术者不能有一丝犹豫、胆怯和优柔寡断，必须有效和流畅的主导手术。	One cannot remain hesitant, timid, and indecisive. The surgeon must direct the operation efficiency and fluently.
手术过程后期术者疲劳是一个极大影响预后的重要因素。	Fatigue becomes an important factor later in the procedure and can dramatically affect the outcome.
图16. 术前笔者不会常规进行AVM的栓塞（左图）。	Figure 16: I do not routinely embolize AVMs before surgery (left image).
笔者认为皮层供血动脉（通常术中易于处理）的栓塞会因本已让人发憷的脑白质内的穿支供血动脉的功能增加更加难于处理（右图）。	In fact, I believe embolization of cortical pedicles (often easily managed during surgery) leads to an increase in the functional role of daunting white matter perforators (right image).
这种现象是因为每个AVM内均存在持续发挥作用的动静脉分流，	This phenomenon is founded on the principle that each AVM will persist in its role of arteriovenous shunting.
如果栓塞了AVM较大的供血动脉，血流会设法转入到因导管无法抵达而不能栓塞的脑白质内的供血动脉。	If the large pedicles are lost, the AVM will find a way to shunt through the white matter feeders that are often inaccessible for embolization.
如果在手术中难以早期接近并控制一些供血动脉的病例中（例如供血来自大脑后动脉P2段），建议术前选择性栓塞这些供血动脉。	However, selective embolization of some of the arterial pedicles is advised if these pedicles are not easily accessible early in surgery (i.e., P2 feeders).
手术易于处理的供血血管应该保留以避免脑白质内供血动脉的增生。	The accessible pedicles should be left alone to avoid the AVM’s proliferation of white matter feeders.
因此神经外科医师和介入医师直接沟通设计栓塞计划非常重要。	It is important that the planning for the embolization be conducted through direct communication between the neurosurgeon and the endovascular interventionalist.
即使采取完美的技术，AVM的术野无法也不应该保持“绝对无血”，换句话说，术者要对一定程度的微小出血有思想准备并且可以容忍这些小的出血，尤其在手术的最后阶段即将取出AVM时，不要对这种所谓的“取出前风暴”有所恐惧并极力避免。AVM的切除就像驾驶一架飞机，降落时总会有某种程度的“颠簸”，我们应该尽可能避免在巡航高度遇到强烈气流。	Even using perfect techniques, I the surgical field of an AVM cannot and should not be “too dry.” In other words, some degree of minor bleeding should be expected and tolerated, especially around the end of the operation, just before the AVM is extracted.  This “pre-extraction storm” should not be feared and avoided.  Resection of an AVM has been compared to flying a plane.  The landing is always going to be somewhat “bumpy.” We should however avoid the turbulence in the cruising altitude as much as possible.
笔者对术中可控的出血容忍度很高，且可准确判断可控出血何时可能转成无法控制的洪流。	I have a high tolerance for controlled intraoperative bleeding and can gauge the fine line when a controllable bleeding may lead to an uncontrollable torrent.
这种洞察能力可有效的切除大型AVM而无需分期手术。	This understanding has lead to efficient resection of large AVMs without a need for staged operations.
一个伟大的AVM手术医生应该具备的关键元素包括：①将三维解剖瞬间转化为术中所见；②准确的术中决断源自谦逊的态度和“手术直觉”；③手艺精湛；④耐力持久；⑤意志坚定；⑥沉着冷静处理危机；⑦当然最重要的是经验。	The critical ingredients that define a great AVM surgeon include:  1) instantaneous translation of 3D anatomy to intraoperative findings, 2) appropriate surgical judgment refined by humility and “surgical intuition,” 3) manual dexterity, 4) endurance, 5) mental toughness, 6) calm composure in dealing with disasters, and ultimately, 7) experience.
激战中途无处筹划，	There is no place to prepare for the battle when you are fighting it.
因此AVM手术医生必须相当了解一旦手术开始后接近AVM的路图以及困难区域。	The AVM surgeon must intimately understand the roadmaps of the AVM and its difficult territories before commencing the operation.
切除AVM的过程必须优雅流畅而不拖泥带水。	The process of AVM resection should be executed without hesitation, but gracefully.
即使遇到较汹涌的出血，术者的处乱不惊无疑可使整个团队确信无论遇到什么困难，术者均可全程掌控。	Despite torrential bleeding, the operator is in control and has undoubtedly convinced the team that no matter how difficult the moment, he or she can prove his or her commanding omnipresence.
AVM手术检验的不仅是术者的技术实力，同时也是对术者毅力和效率的考验。	AVM surgery tests not only the operator’s technical prowess, but also the operator’s perseverance and efficiency.
这是在我们执业过程中AVM手术与其他所有手术的区别所在。	This phenomenon distinguishes AVM surgery from all other surgeries in our profession.
颞叶动静脉畸形	Temporal AVMs
颞叶的供血动脉既有前循环来源的（通过外侧裂内的大脑中动脉下干供血），也有后循环来源的（通过大脑脚池和环池的大脑后动脉分支供血）。	The arterial supply of the temporal lobe is from both the anterior circulation, via the inferior trunk of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) branches coursing through the Sylvian fissure, and posterior circulation, via the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) branches coursing through the crural and ambient cisterns.
总体来说，颞叶侧裂区及外侧面的血供主要来于自大脑中动脉分支；而颞叶下部及底面主要由大脑后动脉分支供血。	As a general principle, the Sylvian and lateral aspects of the temporal lobe are fed mostly by the MCA branches; the inferior or basal aspects are supplied mostly by the PCA branches.
颞叶前内侧组织，包括杏仁体和海马，血供来自于脉络膜前动脉、丘脑前穿通支（后交通动脉的分支）和大脑后动脉穿通支。	Anteromedial temporal lobe structures, including the amygdala and hippocampus, are supplied by the anterior choroidal artery, the anterior thalamoperforatoring branches of the posterior communicating artery (PCoA) and the PCA perforating arteries.
颞叶后内侧的血供来自大脑后动脉的分支。	Posteromedial parts of the lobe are dependent on the PCA branches.
颞叶动静脉畸形病变位置不同，大脑中动脉和大脑后动脉的供血情况也不同；因此，术前每一例型AVMs都需要单独研究。	These MCA and PCA systems disproportionately supply temporal arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) based on the location of the nidus; their contributions to each AVM should be studied preoperatively.
大脑中动脉近端主干（M1段）有两支供应颞极的早期分支：	The proximal MCA trunk (M1) has two early branches supplying the temporal pole:
1、颞极动脉，颈内动脉分叉远端；	Temporopolar artery, distal to ICA bifurcation
2、颞前动脉，大脑中动脉分叉近端；	Anterior temporal artery, proximal to the MCA bifurcation
这两个分支均起源于M1段的下表面，提供大多数前内侧颞叶AVMs的血供。	These two branches originate from the inferior surface of the M1 trunk and feed most of the anteromedial temporal AVMs.
M1的分叉部分为三种类型：	The M1 terminates in three different patterns:
（1）分成上干（额支）和下干（颞支）两支；	1) bifurcation into the superior (frontal) and inferior (temporal) trunks,
（2）分成上、中、下三干；	2) trifurcation into the superior, middle, and inferior trunks,
（3）分成多干。	or 3) division into multiple trunks.
下干进入外侧裂，延续为M2（脑岛段）和M3（岛盖段）。	The inferior trunk courses through the Sylvian cistern and composes M2 (insular) and M3 (opercular) segments.
然后自外侧裂发出成为M4段皮层支。这些皮层支从前往后包括：	These segments later emerge from the Sylvian fissure to create the M4 cortical branches, including (from anterior to posterior):
1、颞中动脉；	Middle temporal artery
2、颞后动脉；	Posterior temporal artery
3、颞枕动脉；	Temporo-occipital artery
4、角回动脉；	Angular artery
这些分支统一称之为颞叶上动脉。	These branches are collectively referred to as superior temporal arteries.
图1. MCA上干分支成为绝大多数侧裂和颞叶侧面AVMs的供血动脉（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）	Figure 1: The branches from the inferior MCA trunk provide most of the feeding vessels to the Sylvian and lateral temporal AVMs (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
起自大脑后动脉（PCA）的颞叶后部动脉，发出以下分支供血到颞叶内侧面和底面：	The posterior temporal artery arises from the PCA and provides branches to the medial and the basal temporal lobe via:
1、海马动脉发自于大脑脚池和环池，供应钩回、海马旁回前部、海马及齿状回；	Hippocampal arteries originate within the crural and ambient cisterns and supply the uncus, anterior parahippocampal gyrus, hippocampus, and the dentate gyrus.
2、颞叶后动脉分成前、中、后三支，可以是独立的三支，或是发自同一根主干，供应颞叶底面；	Posterior temporal artery, including its anterior, middle, and posterior branches, originate as individual branches or all from a common trunk and supply the basal temporal lobe.
总之，这些分支统称为颞叶下动脉，分布于颞叶底面并供血颞中回。	As a whole, these branches are called inferior temporal arteries. These branches may pass around the basal surface and supply the middle temporal gyrus.
图2. 颞叶内侧面和底面的显微手术解剖与AVMs手术相关。	Figure 2: Microsurgical anatomy of the medial and basal temporal lobe as related to AVM surgery.
经过AVMs周围的血管需要与AVMs的供血动脉区分开来。	The en passage vessels should be differentiated from the AVM’s terminal feeders.
P2段分支的命名不同作者叫法不一。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）	The naming of P2 branches has been inconsistent among different authors (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
根据AVMs的位置分布，其引流静脉非常多变，可以引流到不同的浅静脉及深静脉系统。	Venous drainage is quite variable and is routed to different superficial and deep venous systems according to the location of the AVM.
颞叶外侧面AVMs的引流静脉常常向下引流，然后汇入Labbe静脉，最后流向横窦。	The AVMs on the lateral surface typically drain into the descending veins, joining the vein of Labbe and ultimately the transverse sinus.
颞叶内侧面和底面的AVMs常常引流至直窦，罕见引流至蝶窦、岩窦或居中的基底静脉。	The AVMs on the basal and the medial surfaces drain into the tentorial sinuses, rarely into the sphenobasal and sphenopetrosal and/or medially into the basal vein of Rosenthal.
颞叶浅静脉引流侧裂表层的AVMs。	The superficial temporal veins drain the superficial Sylvian AVMs.
颞叶AVMs的分型	TEMPORAL AVM SUBTYPES
一、颞叶外侧面AVMs	Lateral Temporal AVM
此亚型AVMs的主要供血动脉根据病灶的位置、大小及复杂性而不同。	The dominancy of the feeders for this subtype differs according to the location, size, and complexity of the nidus.
AVMs的前方主要供血动脉有颞前动脉和颞极动脉；上方有MCA下干的分支动脉供血，后方和下方由颞叶后动脉和颞枕动脉供血。	These feeders mainly include the anterior temporal and temporopolararteries at the anterior border; branches of the inferior trunk of the MCA at the superior border, as well as posterior temporal and temporo-occipitalarteries at the posterior and inferior margins of the AVM.
图3. 颞叶外侧面AVMs是基底位于颞叶凸面的锥形病变，通常锥形病变的尖端伸向颞叶深部的颞角室管膜表面。	Figure 3: Lateral temporal AVMs are cone-shaped lesions based on the lateral temporal convexity, often extending deep to the level of the temporal horn ependymal surface.
因为外侧面是颞叶最大的表面，因而此AVMs亚型是AVMs中最常见的亚型。	Because the lateral aspect of the lobe is its largest surface, this AVM subtype is the most common subtype among the temporal AVMs.
其静脉引流也由于病灶位置及复杂性而有变化，不过主要引流静脉主要位于颞叶浅表并向后下引入Labbé静脉。	Venous drainage is also variable depending on the location and complexity of the nidus, but it is mostly superficial and descends into the vein of Labbé.
引流静脉也可能向上引流到大脑侧裂浅静脉和蝶顶窦。	The drainage can also ascend toward the superficial Sylvian vein and sphenoparietal sinus.
扩展到颞角室管膜表面的大型AVMs，由位于脑组织内侧的脉络膜前动脉和大脑后P2段的小穿支动脉供血。	In large lesions extending to the ependymal surface of the temporal horn, there are small feeders from the anterior choroidal artery and the P2 segment at the deeper part of the parenchymal dissection.
图4. 简单的颞叶外侧面AVMs。	Figure 4: A simple lateral temporal lobe AVM is demonstrated.
这是位于颞叶下方颞下回的病变，P2段分支颞后动脉于病灶后缘进入并参与供血。	For more inferiorly located temporal lesions on the inferior temporal gyrus, the posterior temporal arteries from the P2 segment is also involved at the posterior border of the nidus.
注意向后方引流的粗大引流静脉（见侧位和正位的颈内动脉造影）。	Note the large draining vein coursing posteriorly (lower row-lateral and anteroposterior ICA angiograms).
主要的供血来源于颞叶上动脉。	The predominance of the superior temporal artery feeders is apparent.
对于优势半球颞叶后方的病变，需要注意保留Wernicke语言区，它位于距颞极约5厘米的颞中、颞上回。	For posteriorly located lesions on the dominant hemisphere, an important consideration is preservation of the Wernicke’s speech area, located about 5 cm from the temporal pole along the middle and superior temporal gyri.
笔者不建议术前利用功能磁共振标记（语言功能区）或术中唤醒下开颅切除任何AVMs。	I do not advise preresection mapping or the use of an awake craniotomy for resection of any AVM. Compact nidi may be removed with a low risk of permanent speech dysfunction through the transsulcal approach.
通过脑沟间入路可以达到病灶的完整切除，永久性语言功能损伤的风险很低。	The craniotomy is planned according to the location of the lesion.
开颅按照病变位置进行规划，对于位于外耳道之前的病变，可以采用标准翼点入路。	For anteriorly located lateral temporal AVMs (in front of the external auditory canal), a tailored pterional craniotomyis reasonable.
而位于颞叶后部的病变可以考虑进行颞下入路开颅。	A temporal craniotomyis more appropriate for posterior temporal AVMs.
两种入路的患者均为平卧位，头向对侧旋转。	Both of these approaches are performed with the patient in the supine position with contralateral head rotation.
颞下入路头部旋转90度，使得中轴线处于水平位。	The head rotation is 90 degrees for the temporal craniotomy to make the midline axis positioned horizontally.
颅骨、硬脑膜的打开要尽量充分。	The extent of the craniotomy and dural opening should be generous.
源于脑膜中动脉的跨硬膜小供血血管可以为AVMs供血，术者打开硬膜时应该仔细查找并发现这些血管以防撕裂。	Small transdural feeders from the middle meningeal artery may supply the AVM, and the operator should look for these to prevent their avulsion during dural mobilization.
打开硬脑膜时应该注意保护Labbe静脉。	Dural opening should accommodate the safety of the vein of Labbe.
首先在脑沟进行蛛网膜的解剖，并在病变周缘循着大的供血动脉进行分离;清晰分辨供血动脉和引流静脉。	Arachnoid dissection starts through the sulcal planes and follows the large feeding vessels in a circumferential manner; the arterial feeders and draining veins are clearly identified.
循着大的供血血管分离直到病变部位才能阻断，因为在向病变延伸的过程中会发出血管供应语言皮层或其他（功能）静止性皮层。	The feeding arteries should be pursued to the level of the nidus and only then sacrificed because some of the cortical Sylvian feeders may be en passage and on their way to supply the language cortices or other unaffected areas of the brain.
病变深部四周的供血血管可以通过吸除病灶周围薄层组织（胶质增生带），以便显露并尽量靠近病灶阻断。	The deep feeders should also be interrupted in a circumferential manner by parenchymal dissection as close to the nidus as possible.
经脑沟分离切除Wernicke区小的致密型AVMs是安全可行的。	Intrasulcal dissection of small compact AVMs within the Wernicke’s area is safely possible.
延伸到颞角并接受脉络膜前动脉供血的大型AVMs,脉络裂内的脉络膜前动脉主干和非供血的穿支动脉应该小心保护。	Large AVMs extend into the temporal horn and receive feeders from the anterior choroidal arteries; this artery’s main trunk and nonfeeding perforators should be carefully preserved proximally within the choroidal fissure.
优势侧的海马体应当保留以免出现记忆功能障碍。	The dominant hippocampus should be spared to avoid disabling memory dysfunction.
向大型AVMs供血的高流量P2段可导致PCA的逆行性血栓形成和视野部分缺损。	Disconnection of the high-flow P2 segments leading to large AVMs may cause retrograde thrombosis of the PCA and partial visual field defects.
所有引流到Labbé静脉或颞浅静脉的静脉应该保留完好，直到病灶的环形分离完成。	All venous drainage to the vein of Labbé or superficial temporal veins should be saved intact until the completion of thorough circumdissection.
图5. 右侧颞顶叶外侧面大型、复杂AVMs（侧位和前后位的ICA脑血管造影-上图）。	Figure 5: A large complex right-sided lateral temporoparietal AVM is shown (lateral and anteroposterior ICA injections-upper images).
MCA的供血分支（左下图）和P2来源的供血动脉夹闭后切断。	The MCA feeders (left lower image) and P2 feeders were clipped and transected.
临时阻断静脉（右下图）以明确病灶没有血供，之后进行AVMs的离断移除。	Temporary venous occlusion (right lower photo) confirmed adequate nidal devascularization, after which the AVM was delivered.
图6. 破裂的颞叶外侧面AVMs切除。	Figure 6: A ruptured lateral temporal AVM underwent resection.
注意粗大并动脉化的Labbe 静脉（第一行）。	Note the large arterialized vein of Labbe (first row).
直切口开颅形成颞部骨瓣，经脑沟入路确认MCA远端粗大的供血血管（第二行）。	A right temporal craniotomy was completed using a linear incision and the large distal MCA feeding vessel was identified by means of intersulcal dissection(secondrow).
这个MCA分支是从病灶边缘路过的血管，沿着它分出许多AVMs的供养血管。	This vessel was assumed to be en passage and provided numerous feeders to the AVM along its length.
病灶恰位于此“过路动脉”的上方，当此动脉被轮廓化后，病灶也即切除 （最后一行）。	The nidus was situated just superior to thi.e.passage artery;the artery was skeletonized and the nidus removed (last row).
可以看到切除完成后Labbe静脉颜色变深。	Note the darker vein of Labbe at the end of resection.
保存此过路动脉对于避免远端缺血是很重要的。	The preservation of en passage arteries is important for avoidance of distal ischemia.
二、颞叶底面AVMs	Basal Temporal AVM
颞叶底面AVMs可位于颞下回、梭状回、海马旁回。	Basal temporal AVMs sit within the inferior temporal gyrus, fusiform, and/or parahippocampal gyri.
颞叶底面的病灶可能没有可直视的皮层面，除非进行较大范围的颞叶下部切除，并沿病灶切线方向打开手术通道。	The nidus may not have direct cortical presentation unless generous subtemporal dissection and tangential viewing is attempted.
这一手术角度使切除颞叶底面的AVMs比切除外侧面的AVM更具挑战性。	This tangential working angle makes resection of this type of AVM more challenging than lateral temporal AVMs.
其供血动脉大多起源于PCAP2段的颞叶下动脉。	Feeders are mostly arising from the inferior temporal arteries, originating from the P2 segment of the PCA.
在进行AVMs由前向后的环形切除时可以看到这些PCA来源的供血动脉。	These PCA feeders are encountered at the medial border of the AVM after anterior and posterior circumferential dissection.
颞叶上动脉从病变的外侧面供血。	Superior temporal arteries may be recruited at the lateral margin.
引流静脉通常是通过颞叶底面浅静脉流入Labbé静脉，也可能流入基底静脉。	Venous drainage is typically superficial through temporobasal veins en route to the vein of Labbé and potentially to the basal veins of Rosenthal.
颞叶底面的AVMs手术入路常选择经颞或颞下入路，患者取仰卧或侧卧位；	Basal temporal AVMs are approached via temporal/subtemporal craniotomy with the patient in the supine or lateral position; the midline axis of the head is positioned horizontally.
头部中轴线处于水平位，头部向地面下垂，以便利用重力作用使颞叶离开中颅底。	I tilt the head toward the floor to exploit the help of gravity, mobilizing the temporal lobe away from the middle fossa floor.
术者常规用腰大池引流实现早期的颞叶松弛。	I routinely use the lumbar drain to achieve early temporal lobe relaxation.
颅骨切开后骨窗的下界尽量磨平达到中颅窝底水平。	The inferior border of the craniotomy should be drilled away so that it is flush with the level of the middle fossa floor.
打开的乳突气房用骨蜡封闭。	Mastoid air cells are frequently entered and are packed with bone wax.
硬脑膜以颞底方向为基底切开。	The dural opening is based inferiorly.
硬膜后部打开时注意保护Labbé静脉，因为此静脉在汇入横窦之前会在硬脑膜夹层之间走行一段。	The vein of Labbé is protected during the posterior dural incision because this vein may be interdigitated within the dural leaflets before joining the transverse sinus.
如果是这种情况，术者在静脉周边打开硬脑膜，保留一小块硬膜在静脉表面，以保护静脉的完整性。	If this is the case, I open the dura around the vein and leave a piece of the dura intact on the vein to preserve its integrity.
使用腰大池引流放液（每次10 cc，最多80 cc）可以减轻对于脑叶的过度牵拉。	Lumbar CSF drainage is used (10cc aliquots, maximum 80cc) to obviate the need for aggressive lobar retraction.
颞下分离术中注意小心而细致的操作，避免无端损伤从中颅窝硬膜发出的供血动脉。	Subtemporal dissection should be performed cautiously so that small meningeal feeders from the middle fossa dura are not inadvertently avulsed.
Labbé静脉连接脑叶紧贴颅底时，抬起颞叶会有困难。	The main obstacle for temporal lobe mobilization is the vein of Labbé that tethers the lobe to the floor.
特别当病变位于后方时，术者应该小心避免撕裂静脉。	This is especially problematic for posteriorly located lesions where the surgeon should avoid premature avulsion of the vein.
显露后，首先松解静脉硬膜下部分周边的蛛网膜系带，然后覆盖湿脑棉来防止它干燥、破裂。	After exposure, the subdural segment of the vein may be first untethered from its surrounding arachnoid layers, and then covered with wet cottonoid patties to prevent its desiccation and rupture.
在AVMs的边缘开始脑沟的解剖分离，切断颞叶上动脉来源的供血动脉，环形分离病变，逐渐深入，注意与AVMs长轴的角度保持垂直或稍倾斜。	Sulcal dissection starts at the lateral margin of the AVM, interrupting the feeders from the superior temporal arteries, and progresses circumferentially and deeply, but perpendicular/oblique, to the axis of the nidus.
伸入颞下病变的两侧、前方、后方分离松动后即可显露底部的供血动脉。	Inferior temporal feeders are exposed after lateral, anterior, and posterior dissection and mobilization of the nidus into the subtemporal space.
这样，可以显露并离断位于中线小脑幕切迹的颞叶后动脉。	In this way, the posterior temporal arteries are exposed and interrupted along the medial margin at the tentorial incisura.
近中线部位有限的操作空间使出血的控制变得复杂。	The limited working space within the medial edge of the lesion can complicate the control of bleeding.
因此，选择性栓塞难以接近的PCA供血动脉是一个合理的策略。	Therefore, selective embolization of the inaccessible PCA feeders is a reasonable strategy.
三、颞叶侧裂AVMs	Sylvian Temporal AVM
此AVMs亚型位于颞上回侧裂表面，主要由MCA下干的上中部分支供血。	This AVM subtype is situated on the Sylvian surface of the superior temporal gyrus and fed primarily by the MCA inferior trunk at its superior and medial aspects.
如果病灶的范围达到颞角，脉络膜前动脉及其分支也可能参与供血。	Depending on the reach of the nidus into the temporal horn, the anterior choroidal artery and its branches may also participate in the lesion.
颞叶侧裂AVMs不会侵犯额叶岛盖及岛叶皮层的软膜。	Sylvian temporal AVMs do not invade the pial surface of the frontal opercula and insular cortices.
它们可能会因此在颞上回外侧面皮层上没有任何的表象，除了引流静脉的动脉化是一个明显标志。	They may therefore have no cortical presentation on the lateral aspect of the superior temporal gyrus except for an arterialized draining vein that is apparent as a landmark.
引流静脉大多位置表浅，也可累及侧裂上静脉及深部静脉。	Venous drainage is superficial and involves superior and deep Sylvian veins.
图7. 图示的是左侧侧裂破裂AVMs。	Figure 7: A ruptured left-sided Sylvian temporal AVM is demonstrated.
ICA血管造影斜位片显示动脉早期/晚期（上层图像）。	The early and late arterial phases of the oblique ICA angiogram are included (upper images).
侧裂的广泛解剖分离后可以将MCA分支轮廓化并断开AVMs的供血血管（中图）。	Wide Sylvian fissure dissection allowed skeletonization of the MCA branches and disconnection of the AVM feeding vessels (middle photo).
随着病灶供血动脉的离断，即可切断引流静脉；剩下的皮层静脉颜色转为深蓝色（下图）。	Following disconnection of the nidus, the draining veins were sacrificed; the remaining cortical veins turned dark blue (lower photo).
病人体位和开颅与额叶侧裂AVMs相同。	The patient’s position and craniotomy are the same as those for frontal Sylvian AVMs.
平卧位翼点开颅。	The supine position is used via a pterional craniotomy.
我主张广泛且深入的分离大脑侧裂，分离时将浅表的动脉化侧裂静脉留在侧裂的颞侧，然后将M2和M3主干轮廓化。	I advocate a generous and deep Sylvian fissure split while leaving arterialized superficial Sylvian veins on the temporal side of the fissure and skeletonizing the M2 and M3 trunks.
这些操作可以让术者区分供血血管的终末端、过路动脉和脑裂中其他与病灶无关的重要血管。	These maneuvers allow me to differentiate terminal feeders, transit arteries, and bystanders within a fissure that is full of various vital branches.
从病变的上中部开始切开病变表面的脑沟及软膜，阻断供血血管，在从MCA近心端向远端分离的过程中保留过路动脉及周边动脉的完好。	Sulcal and pial dissection starts at the superamedial side of the lesion to interrupt the feeders, leaving the transit arteries and bystanders intact during proximal to distal dissection of the MCA feeders.
环状的切开分离可以游离颞角内病灶的顶部，往往可以发现脉络膜血管并分离。	Circumdissection isolates the apex of the nidus within the temporal horn where the choroidal vessels are found and divided.
侧裂颞叶AVMs有些位于后方，涉及到颞横回和Wernicke区。	Sylvian temporal AVMs may be located posteriorly and involve the Heschl’s and Wernicke’s gyri.
质地紧密AVMs附近的精细显微外科操作可以以最小的永久性神经功能障碍切除AVMs。	Meticulous microsurgery near the AVM’s compact nidus allows removal of these AVMs with minimal permanent risks.
四、颞叶内侧AVM	Medial Temporal AVM
颞叶内侧面AVMs主要涉及钩回、海马体、海马旁回，在外侧皮层看不到任何表象。	Medial temporal AVMs primarily involve the uncus, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus without any cortical representation.
根据它们的大小，这些病变可以侵入到基底节区。	Based on their size, these lesions can infiltrate the basal ganglia.
供血动脉来自脉络膜前动脉、颞前动脉、PCoA的丘脑穿通支、海马动脉、颞叶后部动脉以及PCA的P2段。	Feeders originate from the anterior choroidal artery, anterior temporal artery, thalamoperforator branches of the PCoA, hippocampal artery, posterior temporal arteries, and the P2 segment of the PCA.
引流静脉一般向内侧进入基底静脉，偶尔走向前外侧进入表浅和深部侧裂静脉。	Venous drainage is routed medially toward the basal vein of Rosenthal and occasionally anterolaterally toward the superficial and deep Sylvian veins.
显露这些AVMs需要根据病灶前后端与海马体的位置关系。	Exposure of these AVMs is tailored based on the anteroposterior location of the nidus in relation to the hippocampus.
（1）颞叶前内侧病灶	Anteromedial Temporal Lesions
对位于海马中部之前的病变，术者较喜欢眶颧开颅或更常用扩大翼点入路。	For lesions anterior to the mid portion of the hippocampus, I prefer an orbitozygomatic craniotomy or more frequently, an extended pterional craniotomy.
这些经过侧裂的入路提供了较短的操作距离和宽敞的工作空间。	These approaches offer a short working distance and wide working space through the transsylvian corridor.
手术工作的视线与病灶保持切线方向。	The working angle is tangential.
图8. 经斜位ICA血管造影显示左侧颞叶前内方的AVMs （上图）。	Figure 8: A left-sided anteromedial temporal AVM is shown on an oblique ICA angiogram (top image).
CT血管造影图像（插图）定位AVMs。	CT angiogram images (insets) localized the AVM.
供血动脉源于颞叶前动脉、PCoA丘脑穿通支、海马动脉、颞叶后动脉、P2段。	The feeding vessels were arising from the anterior temporal artery, thalamoperforatoring branches of the PCoA, hippocampal artery, posterior temporal arteries, and the P2 segment.
引流静脉是向内侧引流入基底静脉。	Venous drainage was routed medially toward the basal vein of Rosenthal.
术者通过经侧裂入路切除病变。	I resected the lesion via the transsylvian approach.
可以看到颞前动脉紧贴AVMs经过(下图)。	The anterior temporal artery was draped over the AVM (lower image).
图9. 充分的游离大脑侧裂，开放颈动脉池和基底池，将脉络膜前动脉，P2段轮廓化，断开AVMs内侧面的供血动脉。	Figure 9: Generous Sylvian fissure splitting and opening of the carotid and basal cisterns allows skeletonization of the anterior choroidal artery, P2 segment, and occlusion of the terminal feeders to the medial aspect of the AVM.
保留手术视野中的中脑穿支完好无损。	En passage midbrain perforators are left intact.
注意引流静脉向后方越过钩回。	Note the draining vein coursing posteriorly over the uncus.
MCA（吸引器下）显露。	The MCA (under the suction device) is exposed.
图10. 来自颞前动脉（左）和M1主干（右）的供血血管被游离、切断。	Figure 10: The feeding vessels from the anterior temporal artery (left) and the M1 trunk (right) are isolated and sacrificed.
图11. 其他源于P2、PCoA和脉络膜前动脉的供血血管也被切断。	Figure 11: The other feeding vessels from the P2, PCoA and anterior choroidal arteries are also disconnected.
术者的工作角度与AVMs的轴线相倾斜。	The surgeon’s working angle is oblique to the axis of the AVM.
病灶进入切除视野后，病变的后下缘最不容易被直视。	The posteroinferior margin of the lesion is the least accessible border after the nidus is mobilized into the surgical corridor.
小心操作避免电凝时热传导损伤动眼神经。	The oculomotor nerve is carefully protected from the heat of the coagulation.
软膜下切除钩回可以保护脑干及其穿支血管。	Subpial resection of the uncus can protect the brainstem and its perforating vessels.
术中有快速出血时，不建议盲目进行电凝止血。	Indiscriminate use of cautery in the event of excessive bleeding is not rewarding.
图12. 最终，AVMs供血动脉被完全断开，其引流静脉被切断，病灶被移除。	Figure 12: Ultimately, the AVM is completely disconnected, its draining veins transected and the nidus delivered.
（2）颞叶后方内侧病变	Posteromedial Temporal Lesions
对位于海马中部之后的病变，用颞瓣开颅，类似于用来切除颞叶底面AVMs的骨瓣是合适的。	For lesions posterior to the mid portion of the hippocampus, a temporal craniotomy, similar to the one for basal temporal AVMs, is appropriate.
通过颞叶中下回、梭状回，偶尔穿过海马旁回的跨脑沟、跨脑室操作是必要的。	A transsulcal tranventricular exposure through the middle/inferior, fusiform or rarely the parahippocampal gyri is necessary.
在此入路中，术者的视角同样倾斜于AVMs的长轴。	In this approach, my angle of view is also oblique to the AVM’s axis.
此处病灶的供血动脉和引流静脉位置深在，在解剖分离过程的后期才能看到。	Feeding vessels and draining veins are deep and encountered late in the dissection process.
脉络膜前动脉和PCA 穿支分别位于脉络裂和环池内，	Anterior choroidal artery and PCA tributaries are found within the choroidal fissure and ambient cisterns, respectively.
术中会先看到他们发出的供血动脉，然后在靠近病灶的位置将其切断。	Their feeding vessels are found early and transected at the nidus.
优势半球海马后部、海马旁回被病变侵及，这可能与术后记忆障碍有关。	Dominant posterior hippocampal and parahippocampal involvement may be associated with postoperative memory impairment.
术者有成功应用小脑上经天幕入路治疗小型、中型海马后部及海马旁回AVMs的经验。	I have approached small and moderate sized posterior hippocampal and parahippocampal AVMs through the supracerebellar transtentorial approach with great success.
此入路提供了一个不用过多切除或损伤颞叶的合适的手术通道。	This route provides a suitable operative corridor without any significant temporal lobe retraction or transgression.
但是病灶前方的显露是有限的，因此应该严格选择合适的AVMs。	The anterior extent of exposure is limited, and therefore the appropriate AVM should be carefully selected.
请参见“经天幕切除海马旁病变”一章的适应症及手术技术。	Please see the Transtentorial Approach to Parahippocampal Lesions chapter for indications and techniques.
图13. 大型颞叶后内侧AVMs，主要由脉络膜前动脉供血，如图（ICA和椎动脉造影侧位像，上图）。	Figure 13: A large posterior medial temporal AVM, primarily fed by the anterior choroidal artery, is shown (lateral ICA and vertebral artery, inset, angiograms-upper images).
术者采用经皮层、经脑室、经脉络裂的方法（中图）。	I used the transcortical transventricular transchoroidal approach in this case (middle photo).
在穿过颞角的脉络裂中显露脉络膜前动脉 （中图的插图）。	The anterior choroidal artery was exposed within the choroidal fissure through the temporal horn (middle photo-inset).
AVMs完全游离后，病灶水平的脉络膜前动脉被离断，AVMs去除（下图）。	After disconnection of the AVM, the anterior choroidal artery was sacrificed at the level of the nidus and the AVM extracted (lower photo).
所有浅静脉转为暗蓝色。	All superficial veins turned dark blue.
图14. 图示另一个颞叶后内侧AVMs。	Figure 14: Another posterior medial temporal AVM is shown.
大多数供血动脉源自P2分支（上图）。	Most feeders arose from the P2 branches (upper images).
血肿腔为经皮层入路显微外科操作提供了宽敞的空间。	The hematoma cavity provided ample space for microsurgery via the transcortical approach.
过度增生的P2穿支血管被切断（中图）。移除AVMs （下图）。	The hypertrophied P2 perforating branches were transected (middle images) and the AVM removed (lower photo).
脑室周围动静脉畸形	Periventricular AVMs
脑室和脑室周围动静脉畸形（AVMs）起源于脑室系统的室管膜表面血管，涉及脉络丛及脑室壁的皮层下结构。	Ventricular and periventricular arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) arise from the ependymal surface of the ventricular system and involve the choroid plexuses, as well as the subcortical structures that form the walls of the ventricular system.
脑室病变切除手术不同于实质性的AVMs切除，因为不必对周围的脑组织进行解剖。	Resection of ventricular lesions is different from resection of parenchymal AVMs because less perinidal dissection is necessary.
由于该类型的AVMs缺乏实质性支持，在理论上有很高的出血风险。因此，积极的外科治疗理念可能是合理的。	This lack of parenchymal support or buttress is theorized to predispose these types of AVMs to a higher risk of hemorrhage, and therefore a more aggressive surgical philosophy may be justified.
深入了解脑室和脑室周围的解剖结构和解剖学标志对安全处理和完全切除这些复杂性病变至关重要。	A thorough understanding of the anatomic structures and landmarks within and around the ventricles is crucial for safe and complete resection of these complex lesions.
处理脑深部白质供血动脉是一项特殊挑战，因为其周围神经组织对缺血敏感。	Control of the deep white matter feeders poses a special challenge because the perinidal neural tissue is eloquent.
手术部位深在和操作区域狭窄都增加了AVMs切除的技术难度。	The working depth is long and the operative window is narrow; these factors add to the technical complexity of AVM resection.
脑室系统由侧脑室、第三脑室及第四脑室组成。	The ventricular system is composed of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles.
侧脑室分别通过各自的室间孔（Monro 孔）汇入第三脑室。	Lateral ventricles irrigate into the third ventricle through their respective foramina of Monro.
第三脑室通过中脑导水管连接第四脑室。	The third ventricle connects to the fourth ventricle via the aqueduct of Sylvius.
第四脑室通过双侧Luschka孔和Magendie正中孔（译者注：即第四脑室孔）引流入小脑延髓池。	The fourth ventricle subsequently drains into the cerebellomedullary cisterns via the bilateral foramina of Luschka and the midline foramen of Magendie.
欲了解更多详情，请关注后续章节：脑室系统解剖学（Anatomy of the VentricularSystem）。	For more details, please refer to the Anatomy of the Ventricular System chapter.
侧脑室分为五部分：前角、体部、房部、颞角及枕角。	The lateral ventricles are divided into five segments: the frontal horn, body, atrium, temporal horn, and occipital horn.
脉络丛位于体部、房部和颞角处，与第三脑室顶毗邻，向后延伸至松果体区。	The body, atrium, and temporal horn house the choroid plexus, which is contiguous with the roof of the third ventricle, extending posteriorly into the suprapineal region.
进行脑室和脑室周围手术时，密切关注与脑室周围系统相毗邻的神经结构至关重要。	An intimate awareness of the eloquent neural structures within and adjacent to the periventricular system is paramount during intraventricular and periventricular surgery.
对于侧脑室手术，这些重要结构包括胼胝体、穹隆体及尾状核。	For lateral ventricular surgery, these major structures of interest include the corpus callosum, forniceal bodies, and caudate nucleus.
胼胝体分为四部分：嘴部、膝部、体部和压部。	The corpus callosum is divided into four segments: the rostrum, genu, body, and splenium.
胼胝体是构成脑室壁系统最大的单一结构，	The corpus callosum is the largest single structure establishing the walls of the ventricular system.
位于侧脑室上内侧缘。	It is located along the superomedial borders of the lateral ventricles.
尾状核由尾状核头部、体部和尾部三部分组成。	The caudate nucleus is divided into three segments: the head, body, and tail.
侧脑室侧壁沿尾状核头部和体部与尾状核相邻，	The caudate nucleus borders the lateral wall of the lateral ventricles along its head and body.
尾状核尾部与颞角顶部相毗邻。	and its tail borders the roof of the temporal horn.
穹隆由伞部和体部两部分组成。	The fornix is divided into the fimbria and the body.
作为边缘系统和边缘系统环路的一部分，穹隆包含海马乳头体，其通过前部双侧穹窿柱起于海马止于乳头体。	The fornix, as a component of the limbic system and Papez circuit, contains the hippocampomammillary tracts arising from the hippocampus en route to the mammillary bodies via its anterior pillars.
脉络膜裂位于穹隆和丘脑之间，是一呈C型的解剖学间隙，脉络丛通过侧脑室体部、房部和颞角附着于此。	The choroidal fissure is a C-shaped anatomic cleft between the fornix and thalamus, where the choroid plexus is anchored during its course through the lateral ventricular body, atria, and temporal horn.
侧脑室体部的脉络膜裂通过室间孔进入第三脑室顶和中间帆。	The choroidal fissure within the body of the lateral ventricle continues into the third ventricular roof and the velum interpositum via the foramen of Monro.
第三脑室是位于两侧丘脑和下丘脑之间居正中的结构。	The third ventricle is a midline structure housed between the two thalami and hypothalami.
其通过室间孔、中脑导水管分别与侧脑室和第四脑室相通。	It communicates rostrally with the lateral ventricles via the foramina of Monro, and caudally with the fourth ventricle through the aqueduct of Sylvius.
第三脑室顶包含穹隆体、脉络组织、后内侧的脉络膜动脉和大脑内静脉（ICVs）。	Its roof contains the forniceal body, tela choroidea, the medial posterior choroidal arteries, and the internal cerebral veins (ICVs).
第三脑室内的脉络组织由中间帆隔开，软脑膜内陷反折形成两层。	Within the third ventricle there are two layers of tela choroidea, separated by the velum interpositum, an invagination of the pia matter.
幕上脑室系统的主要供血动脉为脉络膜动脉前部和后部的分支。	The main arterial feeders to the supratentorial ventricular system are the branches of the anterior and posterior choroidal arteries.
这些动脉分支在脑室周围AVMs形成中起到重要作用，具体讨论如下。	These branches play an important role in supplying the periventricular AVMs and are therefore discussed in detail below.
脉络膜前动脉作为颈内动脉（ICA）床突上段最重要的分支位于后交通动脉起点和颈内动脉止点之间，分为脑池段和脑室段两部分。	The anterior choroidal artery arises as the last main branch of the supraclinoid internal carotid artery (ICA) between the origin of the posterior communicating artery and the internal carotid artery termination. It is divided into its cisternal and intraventricular segments.
1.脑池段：起源于ICA，脉络膜前动脉（AChA）沿视束后内侧及下内侧走形，进入大脑脚和钩回之间的大脑脚池。	Cisternal segment: From its origin at the ICA, the anterior choroidal artery (AChA) courses posteromedially, inferomedial to the optic tract, and into the crural cistern to travel between the cerebral peduncle and uncus.
从海马沟附近入脉络膜裂。	Here it turns rostrally to enter the choroidal fissure.
该段动脉对视束、大脑脚中间1/3、内囊后支、外侧膝状体、苍白球和视辐射的血供起到非常重要作用。	This segment gives rise to highly eloquent arterial supply, including the optic tract, middle third of the cerebral peduncle, posterior limb of the internal capsule, lateral geniculate body, globus pallidus, and optic radiations.
2.脑室段或脉络丛段：该段起始处动脉进入脉络膜裂和颞角（下脉络点）供应毗邻的脉络丛。	Intraventricular or plexal segment: This segment begins where the artery enters the choroidal fissure and the temporal horn (the inferior choroidal point) to supply the adjacent choroid plexus.
其走行沿脉络丛内侧缘与脉络膜动脉后外侧分支相吻合（讨论如下）。	It courses along the medial border of the choroid plexus, anastomosing with the branches of the lateral posterior choroidal artery (discussed below).
与脑池段动脉相比，该段血供很少有重要结构。	This segment rarely perfuses eloquent structures compared with its cisternal segment.
图1.脉络膜前动脉（AChA）的显微解剖。	Figure 1: The microsurgical anatomy of the anterior choroidal artery (AChA) is shown.
最上两幅图为左侧颞下入路显示AChA起源，	The images of the top two rows demonstrate the origin of the AChA via a left-sided subtemporal approach.
注意脉络膜后内动脉（MPChA）位置。	Note the location of the medial posterior choroidal artery (MPChA).
底部图示为外侧颞叶皮质去除后的下脉络点。	The bottom images disclose the inferior choroidal point after removal of the lateral temporal neocortex.
脉络丛段相关解剖的下面观及对应的穿支血管如图所示（绿色箭头）（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	The inferior view of the relevant anatomy of the plexal segment and the corresponding perforating vessels (green arrows) are shown (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
脉络膜后内侧动脉和脉络膜后外侧动脉组成：	The posterior choroidal artery refers to its medial and lateral components:
1.脉络膜后内侧动脉（MPChA）：其通常起自大脑后动脉（PCA）后交通段（P2）的大脑脚部，或者是四叠体段（P3）。	Medial posterior choroidal artery (MPChA): This artery commonly arises from the crural section of the postcommunicating segment (P2) of the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), or alternatively from its quadrigeminal segment (P3).
走形于中脑周围，向前与上丘相邻，	It courses along the circumferential extent of the midbrain and travels anteriorly adjacent to the superior colliculus.
继续沿第三脑室顶前行进入中间帆，形成第三脑室脉络丛，	It then continues rostrally to travel along the roof of the third ventricle, where it resides within the velum interpositum.
并通过室间孔进入侧脑室与脉络丛连接。	Next, it enters the lateral ventricle through the foramen of Monro and courses over the floor.
该动脉发出的重要分支通过其走行范围供应一些重要的神经结构。	The artery gives off vital branches to several eloquent structures throughout its long course.
该动脉是累及脉络丛AVMs最重要的参与血管。	This artery participates in most of the AVMs involving the choroid plexus.
2.脉络膜后外侧动脉（LPChA）：其通常起自PCA后交通段（P2）的周围部，	Lateral posterior choroidal artery (LPChA): Commonly arises from the ambient section of the postcommunicating segment (P2) of the PCA.
然后通过环池直到颞后角/侧脑室房部，从该部位进入脉络膜裂。	It then courses through the ambient cistern until it reaches the posterior temporal horn/atrium where it penetrates through the choroidal fissure.
与脉络膜前动脉一样，该动脉与脉络膜后内侧动脉存在一些吻合支。	Several anastomoses exist between this artery and the medial posterior choroidal artery, as well the anterior choroidal artery.
图2. 请参阅图1获得更多MPChA和LPChA解剖详情。	Figure 2: Please refer to Figure 1 for more anatomical details relevant to the MPChA and LPChA.
最上矢状图为MPChA与第三脑室的解剖关系。	The top sagittal photo in the current figure illustrates the anatomic relationship of the MPChA to the third ventricle.
中间图为通过左侧颞角显示更多LPChA近心端解剖关系，下图为下面观显示MPChA解剖与第三脑室的关系（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	The middle image demonstrates the more proximal anatomy of the LPChA through the left temporal horn, whereas the bottom photo shows the MPChA anatomy relative to the third ventricle from an inferior point of view (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3. 进一步显示MPChA和LPChA的显微解剖关系。	Figure 3: This illustration further demonstrates the microsurgical anatomy of the MPChA and LPChA.
在脑室壁上通常可以见到这些吻合支动脉。	Anastamoses between these arteries on the ventricular wall are frequently seen.
术中脑室静脉系统可以提供重要的解剖学标志，主要相关的静脉如下：	The ventricular venous system can provide important landmarks during the operation. The major veins of interest are as follows:
1.透明隔静脉：前、后透明间隔静脉引流侧脑室额角内侧血液并与ICVs吻合。	Septal veins: Anterior and posterior septal veins drain the medial frontal horn of the lateral ventricle and anastomose with the ICVs.
2.尾状核静脉：前、后尾状核静脉引流侧脑室额角外侧血液并与丘脑纹状体静脉吻合。	Caudate veins: Anterior and posterior caudate veins drain the lateral frontal horn and anastomose with the thalamostriate veins.
3.丘脑纹状体静脉：其走形于尾状核和丘脑之间，在室间孔后缘（血管造影的静脉角）进入中间帆，与起源于ICVs的脉络膜上静脉吻合。	Thalamostriate vein: This vein courses between the caudate nucleus and thalamus, enters the velum interpositum at the posterior margin of the foramen of Monro (angiographic venous angle), and anastomoses with the superior choroidal vein to form the ICVs.
4.大脑内静脉：这些成对的静脉走形于中间帆，起源于室间孔，并与Rosenthal基底静脉和来自于Galen静脉（译者注：大脑大静脉）的小脑中央前静脉相吻合。	Internal cerebral veins (ICVs): These paired veins travel within the velum interpositum, originate at the foramen of Monro, and anastomose with the basal veins of Rosenthal and precentral cerebellar veins to form the vein of Galen.
5.脉络膜静脉：脉络膜前动脉走形于侧脑室的脉络丛内，与起自ICVs的丘脑纹状体静脉吻合。	Choroidal veins: The superior choroidal veins course in the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricle and anastomose with the thalamostriate veins to form the ICVs.
脉络膜下静脉跨过颞角与杏仁核静脉吻合，随即引流入Rosenthal基底静脉。	The inferior choroidal vein navigates in the temporal horn, anastomoses with the amygdaloid vein and subsequently drains into the basal vein of Rosenthal.
6.房静脉：房部内、外侧静脉分别引流侧脑室房部内、外侧壁血液。	Atrial veins: Medial and lateral atrial veins drain the medial and lateral walls of the atrium, respectively.
内侧房静脉引流入ICVs，	The medial atrial vein drains into the ICVs.
外侧房静脉引流入Rosenthal基底静脉。	The lateral vein drains into the basal vein of Rosenthal.
图4.文中涉及的静脉如上图所示。	Figure 4: Some of the above mentioned veins in the text are shown in the above photos.
最上和中间图为穹隆体去除后图像，	The forniceal bodies have been reflected posteriorly in the images of the top and middle rows.
底部为室间孔高倍镜放大后图。	A more highly magnified view of the foramen of Monro is demonstrated in the bottom row of images.
穹窿柱来自于室间孔的前、上壁（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	The columns of fornix form the anterior and superior walls of the foramen (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
脑室/脑室周围AVM切除	VENTRICULAR/PERIVENTRICULAR AVM RESECTION
脑室AVM的分类众多，笔者将按照由Lawton教授提出的胼胝体AVMs，脑室体部、房部和颞角的AVMs展开探讨。	A number of categorization schemes are proposed for ventricular AVMs. I will discuss the callosal, ventricular body, atrial, and temporal horn AVMs as described by Lawton.
胼胝体AVMs	Callosal AVMs
胼胝体AVMs是脑室/脑室周围AVMs最常见的亚型。该病变通常仅表现为胼胝体占位，但也可以向上延伸至扣带回或者向下挤压侧脑室。	Callosal AVMs are the most common subtype of ventricular/periventricular AVMs. These lesions typically occupy the corpus callosum alone, but can extend into the cingulate gyrus superiorly or extrude into the lateral ventricle inferiorly.
患者体位和手术操作准备阶段详见经纵裂入路开颅手术（Interhemispheric Craniotomy）章节。	Patient positioning and the initial stages of the operation are summarized in the Interhemispheric Craniotomy chapter.
笔者先将患者置于仰卧位或侧卧位（右侧位或非手术侧朝下），然后将头部转向90度使大脑镰与地面平行。	I place the patient in the supine or lateral position (right or nondominant side “down”) while the head is turned 90 degrees to align the falx cerebri parallel to the floor.
在上矢状窦处开颅去除骨瓣，	The craniotomy unroofs the superior sagittal sinus.
移除骨瓣时切口向前延伸2/3，冠状缝后延伸1/3以避开中央小叶胼胝体前部的AVMs。	Bone removal extends two-thirds in front and one-third behind the coronal suture to avoid the central lobule for anterior callosal AVMs.
经纵裂扩大入路可以处理中线病变。	Interhemispheric dissection expands the operative corridor toward the midline lesions.
幸运的是，矢状窦引流静脉不会使手术通路受限，因为引流静脉主要向下、向后引流汇入病灶了。	Fortunately, parasagittal draining veins do not limit the operative corridor because the draining veins are primarily inferior or posterior to the nidus.
图5. 经纵裂入路患者体位。	Figure 5: Patient positioning for the interhemispheric approach is illustrated.
注意患者对侧肩下的垫肩，以缓解颈部过度扭曲。	Note the bulky gel under the contralateral shoulder, relieving the need for excessive neck torsion.
一旦大脑纵裂的蛛网膜和扣带回发生粘连需要大胆的进行松解，靠大脑重力的收缩作用暴露胼胝体AVM。这种无牵拉入路沿大脑镰暴露胼胝体，显示其前、后供血动脉，需与胼周动脉鉴别。	Once the arachnoid adhesions of the interhemispheric fissure and the intercingulate gyri are generously released, gravity retraction of the dependent hemisphere facilitates optimal exposure of the callosal AVM. This retractorless approach along the falx exposes the corpus callosum where the anterior and posterior feeding arteries, including the callosomarginal artery, are identified.
基于这种观点，外科医生应该留意与胼胝体AVMs有关的脑血管组成。位于沿胼胝体方向从前到后的AVM决定了大脑前动脉（ACA）和大脑后动脉（PCA）发展为AVM的稳定性。	At this point, the surgeon should be mindful of the important cerebrovascular components associated with the callosal AVMs. The anterior-to-posterior location of the AVM along the callosum determines the robustness of the contributions of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and posterior cerebral artery (PCA) to the AVM.
对于胼胝体前部AVMs，主要的动脉血供起源于ACA分支，包括胼周动脉。	For anterior callosal lesions, the primary arterial blood supply arises from the branches of the ACA, including the pericallosal arteries.
胼胝体病变中，引流静脉包括深部脑室静脉系统，其中有透明隔静脉、尾状核静脉、丘脑纹状体静脉、ICVs和Galen静脉。	Venous drainage includes the deep ventricular venous system, including the septal, caudate, and thalamostriate veins, ICVs, and the vein of Galen in splenium lesions.
接下来，检查AVM前缘和后缘大型皮质和胼胝体的供血动脉，	Next, the anterior and posterior borders of the AVM are inspected for large cortical and callosal feeding arteries.
精细的解剖分离这些进入病灶的动脉，然后切断。	These arteries are meticulously dissected to their point of entry into the nidus and then they are disconnected.
鉴别双侧胼周动脉及保护其穿通支血管。	Both pericallosal arteries are identified and thei.e.passage branches are preserved.
图6. 经纵裂入路显示AVM。	Figure 6: The surgeon’s interhemispheric view of the malformation is demonstrated.
注意胼周动脉的轮廓及AVM的供血血管。	Note the skeletonization of the pericallosal arteries and their feeding vessels to the AVM.
图7. 典型的胼胝体AVM血管构筑。	Figure 7: The classic angioarchitecture of a callosal AVM is depicted.
注意AVM周围边缘走形于脑室的引流静脉。	Note the draining veins travelling toward the ventricle around the periphery of the AVM.
术中进行AVM周围解剖分离血管时，这些血管不应故意损伤或电凝。	These veins should not be inadvertently injured or coagulated during circumferential dissection.
通过手术通道初始观察到的AVM表面仅仅是AVM很小的一部分。	The initial visible surface of the AVM through the operative corridor is only a small part of the AVM’s surface.
如果血管畸形部分向脉络丛方向延伸，则还会涉及到脉络丛的供血血管。	If the malformation extends to the level of the choroid plexus, the plexal feeders are involved.
笔者继续对隐匿在脑沟内的供血动脉进行分离。	I continue to skeletonize the arterial feeders hidden within the sulci.
操作过程中，注意AVM螺旋形的大供血动脉和小动脉，要与非供血血管鉴别。	The corkscrew morphology of the large feeding arteries and arterioles provides a clue regarding their identity compared with nonfeeding vessels.
穿通动脉形态正常且形体小。	The en passage arteries have normal morphology and are small.
如果ACA和PCA的主要供血血管没有早期分离，则在接下来的操作中难度很大及有明显相关的大量失血。	If the dominant feeders from the ACA and PCA are not disconnected early, the later steps of dissection will be arduous and associated with a significant amount of blood loss.
按照顺序依次通过胼胝体继续分离病灶周围血供，鉴别供血血管并电凝。	The dissection continues through the corpus callosum around the nidus as the feeders are identified and coagulated in a sequential and circumferential manner.
基于CT血管造影（CTA）的术中导航或影像引导为指导血管分离计划实施和避免不慎误入病灶提供了另一种途径。	Intraoperative navigation or image guidance based on computed tomography angiography guides the planes of disconnection and provides another tool for avoiding inadvertent entry into the nidus.
如果AVM延伸进入扣带回，有必要移动该部分病灶。	If the AVM extends into the cingulate gyrus, mobilization of the nidus in this territory is necessary.
当笔者继续解剖分离白质周围血供时，进入脑室并找到室管膜供血血管，迅速电凝以防脑室内出血。	As I continue circumferential dissection of white matter feeders, I enter the ventricle and find ependymal feeders that are expeditiously coagulated and divided to prevent intraventricular hemorrhage.
过度盲目牵拉AVM血管团会导致室管膜和脉络丛组成血管撕脱，因此不建议盲目牵拉。	Undue and blind traction on the AVM leads to avulsion of the ependymal and plexal contributory vessels and is therefore not advised.
直到到达脑室内AVM边缘才能见到深部引流静脉。	The deep draining veins are not visualized until the intraventricular margins of the AVM are reached.
语言表达能力通常不是这些病变切除的限制因素，但胼胝体压部过度分离可导致离断接综合征。	Eloquence is usually not a limiting consideration in resection of these lesions, but excessive splenial dissection can lead to disconnection syndrome.
对以上操作进行改良，包括后纵裂入路开颅暴露胼胝体压部AVMs。	The above procedure may be modified to include a posterior interhemispheric craniotomy to expose splenial AVMs.
图8. 胼胝体压部AVM大量出血。	Figure 8: A large hemorrhagic splenial AVM is shown.
侧位CTA显示ACA供血动脉和引流静脉汇入Galen静脉。	The lateral CT angiogram demonstrates the ACA feeding arteries and draining veins joining the vein of Galen.
通过非优势侧（第一行图）行后纵裂入路。	The patient underwent a posterior interhemispheric approach via the nondominant side (upper row).
及早发现并处理大的胼胝体周围供血动脉分支（第二行图）。	The large feeding pericallosal branch was found early and sacrificed early (second row).
排除皮质扣带回和对侧胼胝体周围供血血管（第三行图）。	Cortical cingulate and contralateral pericallosal feeders were also excluded (third row).
最终横断PCA供血血管及离断汇入Galen静脉的主要引流静脉。	Ultimately, the PCA feeders were transected and the main draining vein joining the vein of Galen was disconnected.
脑室体部AVMs	Ventricular Body AVMs
脑室体部AVMs是脑室AVMs少见的亚型，位于邻近的脑实质结构交界面，沿侧脑室体部的中线内。	Ventricular body AVMs are a rare subtype of ventricular AVMs, which are located within the midline along the body of the lateral ventricle at the interface of the adjoining parenchymal structures.
这类AVMs的发生部位包括透明隔、穹隆体、中间帆、侧脑室体部或第三脑室的脉络丛。	This category includes AVMs of the septum, forniceal body, velum interpositum, and ventricular body or third ventricular choroid plexus.
图9. 典型脑室体部AVM。	Figure 9: A surgeon’s view of a typical ventricular body AVM is illustrated.
注意从脉络丛和中线透明隔处发出的大量供血血管。	Note the numerous feeding vessels from the choroid plexus and the midline septum.
畸形部常延伸至室间孔。	The malformation often extends into the foramen of Monro.
图10. 脉络丛的供血血管和直接汇入ICVs的引流静脉。	Figure 10: This sketch emphasizes the plexal feeders and the direction of the draining veins toward the ICVs.
与胼胝AVMs处理类似，通过经纵裂-胼胝体入路选择右侧（非优势侧）单侧开颅切除病变。	Similar to callosal AVMs, a right-sided (nondominant) unilateral craniotomy is performed to approach the lesion via an interhemispheric transcallosal approach.
欲获得更多该入路操作详情，请关注后续章节：经纵裂-胼胝体入路（Interhemispheric TranscallosalApproach）。	For more details describing this route, please refer to the Interhemispheric Transcallosal Approach chapter.
图11. 对处理从外侧延伸至中线的病变，笔者喜欢选择经对侧胼胝体入路以减少同侧大脑半球牵拉且可以扩大到达病变外侧的范围。	Figure 11: For lesions that extend lateral to the midline, I favor a contralateral transcallosal route to minimize ipsilateral hemispheric retraction and augment the reach around the lateral aspect of the lesion.
尾状核部的AVMs也选择该入路操作。	Malformations of the caudate are approached via the contralateral transcallosal pathway.
通过经胼胝体扩大室间孔静脉入路（transcallosal expanded transforaminal transvenous approach）处理第三脑室周围病变也是安全的。	Lesions around the third ventricle are safely reached via the transcallosal expanded transforaminal transvenous approach.
术中一旦暴露中间帆，即可鉴别ICVs和脉络膜后内侧动脉。	Once the velum interpositum is exposed, the ICVs and feeding medial posterior choroidal arteries can be identified.
丘脑纹状体静脉可以指导术者发现并保护位于中间帆内的ICVs。	The thalamostriate vein can lead the operator to find and protect the ICVs within the velum interpositum.
ICVs和脉络膜后内侧动脉分别是脑室体部AVMs重要的引流静脉和动脉供血来源。	The ICVs and the medial posterior choroidal arteries are the major venous drainage and arterial feeding sources for ventricular body AVMs, respectively.
位于沿透明隔处的病变血供动脉可以起源于胼周动脉。	Lesions located along the septum may also recruit arterial supply from the pericallosal arteries.
依次分离病变周围血管暴露位于AVM后缘和中间帆近心端的脉络膜后内侧动脉。	Progressive circumferential dissection exposes the medial posterior choroidal artery at the posterior margin of the AVM and proximal to the velum interpositum.
前交通动脉复合体和丘脑穿通动脉也可能参与AVM病灶，形成令人胆怯难以处理的白质供血血管。	The anterior communicating artery complex and thalamoperforating arteries may also contribute to the AVM nidus in the form of daunting white matter feeders.
术中一旦识别证实的血管和确认血管终末端的血供都已闭塞，在病灶周围进行分离解剖，再确认汇入ICVs的主要静脉分离，将病灶取出。	Once the identity of the vessels is verified and their terminal feeding status confirmed, they are occluded. Upon circumdissection of the nidus and identification of the major draining vein joining the ICV, the vein is sacrificed and the nidus removed.
穹隆与这些病变关系密切，想要安全切除富有挑战性。	The fornix is closely related to these lesions, presenting a challenge in their safe resection.
穹隆部的过度操作可导致永久性认知障碍和记忆力衰弱。	Overzealous manipulation of the fornix can result in permanent cognitive and debilitating memory impairments.
侧脑室三角区AVMs	Ventricular Atrium AVMs
侧脑室房部或三角区AVMs是侧脑室/脑室周围AVMs第二常见的亚型病变。	Atrial or trigonal AVMs are the second most common ventricular/periventricular AVM subtype.
顾名思义，其病变常位于侧脑室房部，最常见于房部内侧壁。	As the name suggests, they are located within the atrium of the lateral ventricle and most commonly at the medial atrial wall.
已有很多手术入路可以处理房部内侧壁和三角部的病变。	A number of surgical approaches have been described for lesions within the medial atrial wall and the trigone.
包括前-下颞叶切除、后-下颞叶切除、海马旁回切除、后正中旁顶叶切除、矢状窦切除、扣带回切除。	These approaches include anterior-inferior temporal resection, a posterior-inferior temporal resection, parahippocampal resection, paramedian posterior parietal resection, a parasagittal resection, and cingulate resection.
经对侧后纵裂-大脑镰-楔前叶入路（PITTA）切除房部病变有许多优势，包括开阔的手术通道、减少对同侧大脑的操作，更便于术中导航。	The contralateral posterior interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach (PITTA) to the atrium offers numerous advantages, including a wider operative corridor, minimal ipsilateral brain manipulation, and better intraoperative navigation due to decreased perilesional parenchymal retraction.
其他的入路有侧裂前入路、经皮层后/胼胝体后入路、颞外侧入路或颞下入路。	Other approaches include anterior trans-sylvian, posterior transcortical/transcallosal, and lateral transtemporal or subtemporal routes.
经侧裂前入路处理高难度病变时，手术通道狭窄，有损伤该部位运动纤维束和视辐射的风险。	The anterior trans-sylvian approach provides a very narrow corridor to handle highly vascular lesions, and it places motor fibers and optic radiations at risk.
选择同侧后纵裂经皮层/胼胝体入路需要明显的脑组织牵拉才能到达病变的外侧极。	The ipsilateral posterior interhemispheric transcortical/transcallosal approach demands significant brain retraction to reach the lateral pole of the lesion.
经颞入路有损伤位于三角部外侧壁视辐射的危险。	The transtemporal approaches place the optic radiations that line the lateral wall of the trigone at risk.
基于这些原因，笔者喜欢选择PITTA入路处理侧脑室房部周围病变。	For these reasons, the PITTA is my preferred route to the periatrial lesions.
另外一种到达房部常用的手术入路为通过顶上叶经皮层入路。	Another popular surgical approach to the atrium involves the transcortical route via the superior parietal lobule.
患者取侧卧位，旋转头部使矢状缝与地面平行，颈部屈曲横向抬高顶结节。	The patient is placed in a lateral position and the patient’s head turned so that the sagittal suture is parallel to the floor with the patient’s neck flexed laterally to elevate the parietal eminence.
术中导航下开颅并经皮层入路。	Intraoperative navigation guides the craniotomy and the transcortical trajectory.
通过相应的脉络丛，这些病变的主要供血动脉网包括位于病变下方的脉络膜后外侧动脉及病变上方的脉络膜动脉和脉络膜后内侧动脉。	The primary arterial feeding network of interest for these lesions includes the lateral posterior choroidal artery inferiorly, as well as the anterior choroidal and medial posterior choroidal arteries anteriorly via their corresponding choroid plexuses.
房部的主要静脉与Rosenthal基底静脉和ICVs相吻合。	The atrial veins that anastomose with the basal vein of Rosenthal and ICV are the primary targets for these lesions.
图12.典型的房部AVMs血管解剖示意图。	Figure 12: The vascular anatomy of a classic atrial AVM is shown.
注意起源于前部末梢和脉络膜后动脉的供血血管。	Note the feeding vessels from the distal anterior and posterior choroidal arteries.
该病变与脉络丛关系密切，由于血管增多，AVMs切除过程中可导致出血过多。	These lesions are intimately related to the choroid plexus that is hypervascular and can lead to excessive bleeding during the AVM’s manipulation.
房部脑室壁受占位影响最小。	The atrial wall is minimally affected by the mass.
图13. 笔者喜欢选择经对侧后纵裂-大脑镰-楔前叶入路（PITTA）到达房部周围病变。	Figure 13: I prefer the contralateral posterior interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach (PITTA) for reaching the periatrial lesions.
本图为左侧顶上叶经皮层入路手术视野示意图。	In this sketch, the operative view through the more popular transcortical route via the left superior parietal lobule is shown with the sagittal suture parallel to the floor.
注意侧脑室体部位于图中的下方。	Note the body of the lateral ventricle is on the inferior aspect of this sketch.
脉络膜后外侧动脉和后内侧动脉是病变的主要供血动脉。	The lateral posterior and anterior choroidal arteries provide the dominant feeding arteries to the malformation.
借助PITTA或经顶叶皮层入路进入房部，以病灶的下缘作为目标，鉴别、电凝和分离脉络膜后外侧动脉。	Upon entry into the atrium by means of the PITTA or the transparietal route, the inferior edge of the nidus is targeted and the lateral posterior choroidal arteries are identified, coagulated, and divided.
将AVM向外侧移动，确定深部穿支血管和静脉。	The AVM is mobilized laterally to identify the deep perforators and veins.
该部位发生的病变严重，因为其与丘脑内侧、外侧穹隆脚及内囊后肢相邻。	These are eloquent lesions, given their close proximity to the thalamus medially, crus of the fornix laterally, and internal capsule posteriorly.
视辐射排列于房部外侧壁，对未受影响的脉络丛积极电凝可能导致室管膜缺血和视野缺损。	The optic radiations line the lateral wall of the atrium and aggressive coagulation of the unaffected choroid plexus may lead to ependymal ischemia and visual field deficits.
经纵裂-大脑镰入路和PITTA，有助于暴露AVMs和及早控制脉络膜血管近心端，使正常脑组织损伤降到最小。	The interhemispheric transfalcine approach, PITTA, facilitates adequate exposure of the AVM and early proximal control over the choroidal feeders with minimal normal brain transgression.
此外，PITTA提供了更多手术操作视角处理病变血管，而无需固定牵开器。	In addition, the PITTA affords numerous working angles to manipulate the vascular lesion without a need for fixed retractors.
经纵裂入路通道，不如经皮层入路可以为临近病变结构提供手术定位的解剖学标志。	The interhemispheric corridor, unlike the transcortical routes, provides landmarks for operative orientation to nearby structures.
经颞入路和其他经皮层入路有更多潜在的风险，部分原因是术者在手术早期对血管出血处理的掌控能力有限。	Transtemporal or other transcortical approaches potentially offer more risk, partly because the surgeon has limited control over the feeding vessels early in the operation.
图14. 采用PITTA处理位于房部内侧壁及延伸至房部的AVMs（最上图）。	Figure 14: The use of the PITTA for resection of an AVM on the medial atrial wall and extending into the atrium is shown (top images).
患者侧卧位，头部旋转45度指向地面（第二行图）。	The patient was placed in the lateral position with the head turned 45 degrees toward the floor (second row).
选择经右侧后纵裂-大脑镰入路。	The right-sided posterior interhemispheric transfalcine approach is shown.
注意位于吸引器尖部外侧镰幕硬脑膜小叶内的直窦（第三行图）。	Note the straight sinus within the leaflets of the falcotentorial dura just lateral to the tip of the suction device (third row).
切开楔前叶皮质，迅速确定胼胝体的主要引流静脉（第四行图）。	The primary draining vein is immediately identified over the corpus callosum and a cortical incision in the precuneus is made (fourth row).
切除房部AVM及其周围病灶（底部图）。	The AVM is skeletonized and the atrium is entered at the conclusion of nidal circumdissection (bottom row).
颞角AVMs	Temporal Horn AVMs
颞角AVMs部分或大多数位于脑室内，最佳的入路为限制性（从颞尖3.5cm处）切除颞前（颞中回和颞后回）新皮质。	Temporal horn AVMs are partially or mostly intraventricular and best managed via a limited (3.5cm from the temporal tip) anterior temporal (middle and inferior gyri) neocortical resection.
特别注意Meyer环到颞角的解剖学关系。	The anatomic relationship of the Meyer’s loop to the temporal horn requires special mention.
视辐射走形于颞角顶部，如果颞叶从颞尖切除超过3.5cm，很容易损伤视辐射。	The optic radiations travel over the roof of the temporal horn and are especially vulnerable if the extent of the lobectomy is extended more than 3.5 cm from the temporal tip.
欲了解更多信息，请关注后续章节：前内侧颞叶切除（Anteromedial Temporal Lobectomy）。	For more information, please refer to the Anteromedial Temporal Lobectomy chapter.
在颞角内，按照从前到后的手术路线进行，到达病变的后极。	A tangential anterior-to-posterior operative trajectory within the temporal horn reaches the posterior pole of the malformation.
通过脉络膜裂，直到暴露病变深部及其内侧极，再确认病变的引流静脉和主要供血动脉。	The venous drainage and dominant arterial supply are not identified until the deep and medial poles of the lesion are exposed via the choroidal fissure.
图15. 处理颞角AVMs技术上具有挑战性，因为病灶上覆有来自于脉络膜裂内脉络膜前动脉的供血血管。	Figure 15: Temporal horn AVMs are technically challenging to tackle because the nidus is covering the feeding vessels emerging from the anterior choroidal artery within the choroidal fissure.
笔者通过控制脉络膜供血血管尽可能安全的松解病灶。	I mobilize the nidus as safely as possible without its intrusion to secure some control over the choroidal feeders.
累及脉络膜前动脉时，使用术前栓塞并不安全。	The involvement of the anterior choroidal artery often renders preoperative embolization unsafe.
脉络膜前动脉脑室段或脉络丛段是该部位病变的主要供血血管。	The intraventricular or plexal segment of the anterior choroidal artery provides the dominant feeding pedicle to these lesions.
脉络膜后外侧动脉也参与了病变的形成。	The lateral posterior choroidal arteries provide an alternative contribution.
主要的引流静脉系统包括脉络膜下静脉及通过脑室下静脉吻合进入的Rosenthal基底静脉。	The major venous drainage system consists of the inferior choroidal vein, anastomosing into the basal vein of Rosenthal via the inferior ventricular vein.
暴露颞角后，确认畸形的边界，笔者常小心的松解AVMs并分离脉络膜裂，显露供应病灶的脉络膜前动脉近心端和脉络膜后外动脉的远心端。	After the temporal horn is unveiled and the poles of the malformation identified, I carefully mobilize the malformation and dissect the choroidal fissure, localizing the anterior choroidal artery proximal and the lateral posterior choroidal artery distal to the nidus.
在笔者经脉络膜从近心端至远心端解剖分离过程中，无论如何首先确认病灶供血血管，然后再依次电凝直至深部引流静脉。	During my proximal-to-distal transchoroidal dissection, feeding vessels are first incontestably identified and then coagulated sequentially until the deep venous draining vessels are reached.
这些措施实施过程中，将病灶向上移动以便识别起源于PCA近心端的内侧供血动脉。	During these maneuvers, the nidus is mobilized superiorly so that the medial feeders from the proximal PCA are also identified.
对于汇入Rosenthal基底静脉的AVMs静脉，可以进行栓塞，也可以随病灶切除。	Upon identification of the AVM’s venous input to the basal vein of Rosenthal, the vein can be occluded and the nidus subsequently removed.
颞角AVMs通常不侵犯海马，选择最佳解剖平面入路有助于手术预后，尽管有许多重要的颞叶内侧结构与此毗邻。	Temporal horn AVMs typically do not infiltrate the hippocampus, and judicious choice of dissection planes furnishes rewarding operative outcomes, despite the close proximity of the mass to the eloquent medial dominant temporal lobe structures.
通过精细解剖和仔细甄别病变供血血管，以保留脉络膜前动脉穿通支末梢段，因为损伤穿通支段血管可导致术后偏瘫。	The distal en passage segment of the anterior choroidal artery should be preserved via meticulous dissection and compulsive identification of the feeders to the malformation. Injury to this en passage segment leads to postoperative hemiplegia.
图16. 术中暴露左侧颞角AVM。	Figure 16: An intraoperative photo demonstrates the exposure of a left-sided temporal horn AVM.
病变通过脉络膜裂扩展，与脉络丛密切相关。	The lesion extended through the choroidal fissure and was intimately associated with the choroid plexus.
通过脉络膜裂识别过度生长的脉络膜前动脉血供（插图示）。	Through the choroidal fissure, the hypertrophied feeding anterior choroidal artery was identified (inset).
幕上硬脑膜动静脉瘘	Supratentorial Dural Arteriovenous Fistulas
请阅读“硬脑膜动静脉瘘手术基本原则”一章了解疾病的一般信息，手术指征和术前准备。	For general information, operative indications, and preoperative considerations, please refer to the chapter on the Principles of Dural Arteriovenous Fistula Surgery.
一些硬脑膜动静脉瘘（dural arteriovenous fistulas，dAVFs），	Certain dural arteriovenous fistulas (dAVFs) do not furnish reasonable transarterial or transvenous access routes and are suited for microsurgery.
如筛骨或前颅窝，岩上窦或天幕来源者，并不具备理想的经动脉或静脉途径进行介入治疗，而适合显微手术治疗。	Examples of these operative fistulas are ethmoidal, or anterior fossa, and superior petrosal sinus, or tentorial fistulas.
这些dAVFs与颅内的主干静脉窦无关，因而几乎都由皮层静脉引流。	These fistulas almost always harbor cortical venous drainage since they are not related to a dominant venous sinus.
颅内出血是这些dAVFs最常见的临床表现形式。	Intracranial hemorrhage remains the most common presenting symptom of these fistulas.
出血可发生于脑内、蛛网膜或硬膜下腔。	Hemorrhagic presentations include intracerebral, subarachnoid, or subdural hemorrhage.
非出血的临床表现包括搏动性耳鸣/可闻及的杂音，进行性痴呆，静脉高压相关的缺血样症状，静脉窦回流受阻继发的脑积水。	Nonhemorrhagic manifestations involve pulsatile tinnitus/an auscultable bruit, progressive dementia, ischemic-like symptoms related to venous hypertension, and hydrocephalus from compromised dural venous drainage.
图1. 左侧颈外动脉的前后位血管造影（左图）和侧位血管造影（右图）提示筛骨dAVF，由筛前动脉和大脑镰动脉供血，引流至伴有静脉曲张的皮层静脉，可见静脉动脉化。	Figure 1: Anteroposterior (AP) angiogram of the left external carotid artery (left) and lateral angiogram of the left internal carotid artery (right) demonstrate an ethmoidal dAVF, fed by the anterior ethmoidal and falcine arteries and draining into an arterialized cortical vein associated with venous varices.
筛骨dAVFs位于前颅窝底，由筛前动脉、眼动脉脑膜支和起源自眼动脉的大脑镰前动脉供血，形成瘘口样连接，在额叶下方前颅窝硬脑膜基底部或内侧的大脑镰引流至一根软脑膜静脉（额静脉或嗅静脉）。	Ethmoidal fistulas are located at the anterior fossa floor and fed from the anterior ethmoidal arteries, the dural branches of the ophthalmic artery, and the anterior falcine artery that arises from the ophthalmic artery. They serve a fistulous connection, harboring a pial vein (frontal or olfactory veins) that connects at the base of the anterior fossa dura just under the frontal lobe or medially into the falx.
手术指征	Indications for Microsurgery
自然病史显示，未经过治疗的伴有皮层引流静脉的dAVFs具有较高的致残和致死风险。	As shown by their natural history, untreated dAVFs with cortical venous drainage carry a high risk of morbidity and mortality.
必须通过闭塞瘘口的静脉侧来治疗dAVFs，单纯闭塞动脉将无法获得有效和持久的疗效。	The dAVF must be treated with occlusion of the venous side of the fistula; arterial occlusion alone will not result in an effective and durable cure.
AVMs病灶位于脑实质内，未处理供血动脉前闭塞引流静脉将导致出血和破裂风险增加。与AVMs不同，dAVFs的病灶（或瘘口）则位于增厚的硬脑膜内，	Unlike AVMs, which have a nidus within the brain parenchyma and are subject to hemorrhage and rupture in the event of venous occlusion before all their arterial feeders are disconnected, the dAVF’s nidus (or fistula) is within the contained thickened leaves of the dura.
因此阻断静脉是安全的，且可以达到治愈的效果。	Therefore, venous occlusion is safe and curative.
大部分适合手术干预的幕上dAVFs均为筛骨和矢状窦旁局灶型dAVFs。	The majority of superatentrial fistulas that are suitable for operative intervention are ethmoidal and focal parasagittal dAVFs.
筛骨dAVFs动脉化静脉中的曲张静脉发生破裂的风险高。	Venous varices on the arterialized vein of the ethmoidal dAVFs carry a significant risk of hemorrhage.
由于这些静脉为软脑膜来源，实际操作中无法通过经静脉途径到达。	Due to the pial nature of these veins, there is no practical transvenous route to reach them.
经动脉途径则需要穿过眼动脉，闭塞后存在失明的风险。	The transarterial route is through the ophthalmic artery, rendering transarterial embolization a risk for blindness.
而手术治疗从技术层面上相对容易，风险低，可治愈。	Surgical treatment, however, is technically easy, low risk and curative.
夹闭筛骨和矢状窦旁dAVFs	CLIP LIGATION OF ETHMOIDAL AND PARASAGITTAL dAVFs
筛骨dAVFs	Ethmoidal dAVFs
筛骨dAVFs手术的目的是在瘘口所处的硬脑膜周围发现动脉化的引流静脉，进行结扎并彻底离断。	The goal of ethmoidal dAVF surgery is ligation and disconnection of the arterialized draining vein(s) at the level of the dura where the fistula is located.
一般行单侧眶上开颅即可。	A unilateral supraorbital craniotomy is usually sufficient.
除去引流静脉位于鸡冠两侧的情况，一般很少用到双侧开颅。	A bifrontal craniotomy is rarely needed and only if the fistulous veins are bilateral and on both sides of the crista Galli.
即便是双侧供血的dAVFs，多数情况下该入路也是不必要的，因为需要离断的引流静脉多位于单侧。	However, this approach is usually unnecessary, even with dAVFs with bilateral feeding arteries, because the draining vein is unilateral and is the primary object of disconnection.
患者取仰卧位，轻度伸展头部，使得额叶在重力作用下下垂，但应避免过度后仰而导致眶上缘阻挡手术视野。	The patient is placed in a supine position with the head gently extended so that the frontal lobes fall back with gravity, but not so much that the orbital rim obstructs the operative line of sight.
作者常放置腰大池引流，以便于抬起额叶。	I use a lumbar drain to facilitate frontal lobe mobilization.
在回流静脉同侧，行眉弓或Soutar切口。	An eyebrow or Soutar skin incision is employed, eccentric to the side of the venous drainage.
由于在开颅时额窦往往会被打开，因此需预先保留骨膜。	The pericranium should be harvested because it is likely that the craniotomy will violate the frontal sinus.
作者以眶顶为基底，U形或十字形切开硬脑膜，注意探查和保护下方附着在硬脑膜上的动脉化静脉。	I incise the dura in a “U” or cruciate fashion based on the floor of the orbital roof, taking care to inspect and protect an underlying arterialized vein adherent to the dura.
矢状窦旁dAVFs	Parasagittal dAVFs
该类dAVFs的暴露比较简单，单侧矢状窦旁开颅，相应节段上矢状窦去顶就已足够。	The exposure for this class of dAVFs is simple as a unilateral parasagittal craniotomy with unroofing of the corresponding segment of the superior sagittal sinus is all that is necessary.
仔细电凝并切断硬脑膜供应血管，切开硬脑膜时，围绕上矢状窦作为基底。	The dural feeding vessels should be carefully coagulated and cut as the dura is incised around its base over the superior sagittal sinus.
当硬脑膜被最大程度地翻起后，轻轻抬起额叶，沿着前筛板可找到动脉化引流静脉与脑膜的连接处，该处dAVFs由筛动脉供血，或者在内侧的大脑镰上，由大脑镰前动脉供血。	Once the dura has been maximally mobilized, the frontal lobe is gently elevated and the arterialized draining vein is found at its dural connection along the anterior cribiform plate, where it is fed by the ethmoidal arteries, or medially along the falx, by the anterior falcine artery.
在瘘口处往往可观察到曲张静脉。	There is frequently a venous varix at the site of the fistula.
出血病例中，这些曲张静脉多是出血的来源。	This varix is the site of bleeding in hemorrhagic cases.
将静脉或曲张静脉与周围脑组织分开，在硬脑膜附近动脉化回流静脉起源处放置临时血管夹，确保静脉血恢复暗蓝色。	The vein or the varix is separated from the surrounding brain and a temporary clip is placed on the arterialized vein at its origin close to the dura, ensuring that the arterialized vein turns dark blue.
一旦确认，选择一枚小的永久直夹夹闭静脉，电凝烧灼后离断。	Once confirmed, a small straight permanent clip is placed across the vein and the vein is coagulated and cut.
进一步用荧光造影进行确认。	Fluorescence videoangiogram can confirm the desirable result.
图2. 一例右侧筛骨dAVF（左图，箭头），位于前筛板水平。	Figure 2: A right-sided ethmoidal fistula (left image, arrow) is demonstrated at the level of the anterior cribriform plate.
行右侧眉弓眶上开颅，暴露引流静脉（右图，箭头）。	The draining vein (right image, arrow) was exposed via a right-sided eyebrow supraorbital craniotomy.
在大脑镰旁发现动脉化静脉，烧灼后离断。	The arterialized vein was found next to the falx, coagulated, and divided.
上矢状窦dAVFs少见，约占5%。	Superior sagittal sinus dAVFs are rare entities and comprise 5% of all dAVFs.
窦附近的外伤、肿瘤，和窦内静脉血栓形成在这类dAVF的病理发生中起到一定的作用。	Trauma, tumors near the sinus, and sinus thrombosis have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of this type of fistulas.
这些dAVFs多分布在上矢状窦中部，由硬脑膜中动脉、枕动脉、颞浅动脉、椎动脉和大脑镰前动脉供血。	These dAVFs commonly occur along the midportion of the superior sagittal sinus and are fed by bilateral arterial input from the middle meningeal, occipital, superficial temporal, vertebral, and anterior falcine arteries.
大多数病例中，可通过介入手段有效地闭塞瘘口。	Effective fistulous occlusion can be effectively attained via endovascular methods in most cases.
如果介入手段无法到达病灶，或者介入治疗后再次复发，则需考虑开颅手术。	If endovascular methods are not feasible because of poor access or if the fistula recurs after such treatment, operative intervention is warranted.
显微手术的目的在于离断瘘的引流静脉。	Microsurgery involves disconnection of the fistulous vein(s).
这些病例中，需要骨骼化受累的静脉窦。	Some patients require skeletonization of the pathologic segment of their sinus.
亦可在手术暴露静脉窦后，穿刺静脉窦进行栓塞。	Alternatively, surgical exposure of the sinus allows access for direct sinusal puncture and embolization.
有时可能需要显微手术和介入手段联合治疗。	A combination of microsurgical and endovascular intervention may also be necessary.
如果需要完全阻断受累的上矢状窦，则需要保留窦的后2/3，以降低静脉性梗死的风险。	If complete occlusion of the involved segment of the sinus is warranted, the posterior two-thirds of the patent sinus is preserved to minimize the risk of venous infarction.
图3.图示为左侧额骨后方开颅，夹闭向上矢状窦中部引流的单根窦旁dAVF。	Figure 3: A left posterior frontal craniotomy for clip ligation of a single parasagittal fistula draining into the midportion of the superior sagittal sinus is illustrated.
动脉化的皮层静脉上可见静脉扩张，这种现象在该类型的dAVFs中非常常见，具有较高的出血风险（左图）。	The arterialized cortical vein demonstrates venous ectasias, which are very common in this subtype of dAVFs and carry a significant hemorrhage risk (left).
在动脉化静脉与静脉窦连接处放置血管夹，导致瘘口闭塞（左图，插图），可见曲张静脉转为暗蓝色（右图）。	A clip is placed on the arterialized vein at the site of its connection to the venous sinus with resultant occlusion of the fistula (left image, inset), after which the varices turn dark blue (right).
术中荧光造影确认在扩张或曲张静脉内已呈乏血流状态。	Intraoperative fluorescence videoangiogram can confirm the lack of flow within the venous ectasias or varices.
无需切除曲张静脉。	The varices do not need to be resected.
图4. 一例自发性右侧矢状窦旁dAVF，主要由硬脑膜中动脉分支供血（上图，侧位和前后位颈外动脉造影）。	Figure 4: An idiopathic right-sided parasagittal dAVF fed primarily by the branches of the middle meningeal artery is shown (upper images, lateral and AP ECA angiograms).
夹闭汇入上矢状窦的主要动脉化引流静脉（左下图）。	The main arterialized draining vein joining the superior sagittal sinus was clip ligated (left lower image).
接着，相关的皮层曲张静脉和引流静脉都转为蓝色（右下图，箭头）。	Subsequently, the associated cortical varices and the draining vein (right lower image, arrow) turned blue.
图5.前后位和侧位颈外动脉血管造影（顶行）提示左侧天幕dAVF（箭头），由硬脑膜中动脉分支供血。	Figure 5: These AP and lateral ECA angiograms (top row) demonstrate a left tentorial dAVF (arrows) supplied by the middle meningeal artery branches.
幕上动脉化皮层静脉在颞叶后部形成小的曲张静脉。	The supratentorial arterialized cortical vein was associated with a small varix in the posterior temporal region.
该曲张静脉最终引流至左侧横窦。	This varix ultimately drained into the left transverse sinus.
颞叶后方开颅，暴露动脉化静脉，位于天幕后方（第二行，紫色箭头）。	The arterialized vein over the posterior tentorium (second row, purple arrow) was exposed via a posterior temporal craniotomy;
蓝色箭头所示为Labbe静脉。	the location of the vein of Labbe is marked with a blue arrow.
术中荧光造影显示引流静脉早期显影（第三行，紫色箭头），而此时其他皮层静脉（蓝色箭头）还未显影。	Intraoperative fluorescein angiography demonstrated the early draining fistulous vein (third row, purple arrow) while other cortical veins (blue arrow) did not enhance yet.
在天幕靠近瘘的出口、曲张静脉附近，用血管夹阻断瘘口（底行）。	A clip disconnected the fistula at its exit site and near the varix at the level of the tentorium (bottom photo).
横窦/乙状窦dAVFs	Transverse/Sigmoid Sinus dAVFs
介入下经静脉和/或经动脉途径栓塞是治疗横窦/乙状窦dAVFs的首选方式。	Endovascular transvenous and/or transarterial embolization is the first line of treatment for transverse/sigmoid dAVFs.
然而，在一些少见的病例中，如位于窦汇区的dAVFs，或者有复发倾向的恶性瘘，以及无合适的血管内途径可以到达者，都无法将窦腔进行有效阻断。	However, there are rare cases where the sinus cannot be occluded, such as with a dAVF located at the torcula or a malignant fistula that tends to recur or does not have adequate endovascular access routes.
对于这些病例，可以骨骼化并阻断静脉窦与供血动脉之间的联系。	In these cases, the venous sinuses can be disconnected from their feeding arteries and skeletonized.
横窦/乙状窦dAVFs是颅内最常见的dAVFs。	The dAVFs of the transverse/sigmoid sinuses are the most common intracranial dAVFs.
其主要动脉供血来源于枕动脉的穿乳突分支、耳后动脉、硬脑膜中动脉和潜在的咽升动脉，经过同侧横窦/乙状窦回流，如果同侧窦闭塞，则经过对侧静脉窦回流。	Their main arterial supply arises from the transmastoid branches of the occipital artery, the posterior auricular artery, the middle meningeal artery, and potentially the ascending pharyngeal artery. Venous drainage is via the ipsilateral transverse/sigmoid sinuses or through the contralateral side if the ipsilateral sinus is occluded.
术前经动脉栓塞对于降低术中出血风险是至关重要的。	Preoperative transarterial embolization is crucial in decreasing the risk of intraoperative bleeding.
作者偏好公园躺椅体位，头部面向地板，使得病灶位于头部的最高点。	I prefer the park-bench position, head turned toward the floor, and the lesion placed at the highest point on the head.
一般马蹄形或S形手术切口足以暴露瘘区，依赖CT血管造影行术中导航帮助探查瘘口。	A horseshoe or “S”-shaped incision is used to generously expose the area of the fistula as guided by intraoperative image guidance based on a CT angiogram.
增粗的枕动脉和耳后动脉通过电凝或夹闭后，再行离断。	The hypertrophied occipital and posterior auricular arteries are coagulated or clipped and divided.
头皮和枕下肌肉内含有大量瘘的供血动脉，逐步彻底止血非常重要。	The scalp and suboccipital muscles carry numerous feeders to the fistula and stepwise immaculate hemostasis is paramount.
开颅应暴露横窦和其上下的硬脑膜。	The craniotomy exposes the transverse sinus and the dura above and below it.
作者更偏向颅骨切除，以避免在抬起骨瓣过程中，将穿颅骨至硬脑膜的供血动脉撕裂而导致猛烈的出血。	I usually prefer to perform a craniectomy rather than a craniotomy to prevent the sudden torrential bleeding from the transosseus feeders to the dura during elevation of the bone flap.
可增加磨钻钻孔数量，以避免硬脑膜撕裂。	Any dural laceration is avoided via additional burr holes.
可通过大片的Gelfoam或Surgicel压迫以控制硬脑膜的大出血。	Excessive bleeding from the dura is controlled via tamponade using large pieces of Gelfoam or Surgicel.
可用双极电凝或止血夹处理硬脑膜上的供血动脉。	Dural feeders are managed via bipolar electrocautery or hemostatic clips.
硬脑膜内的操作则取决于dAVFs的解剖特点。	The intradural portion of the operation is conducted based on the specific anatomy of the underlying dAVF.
如果主要目标是离断动脉化的皮层静脉，以横窦为基底在这些静脉的相应位置打开硬脑膜。	If disconnection of the arterialized cortical vein(s) is the main goal, the dura is incised at the corresponding location of these veins and based on the transverse sinus.
应找到并离断所有动脉化的静脉。	All arterialized veins should be found and disconnected.
术中荧光造影和导管造影可以帮助确认目标是否被成功阻断。	Intraoperative fluorescence and catheter angiograms can help confirm the exclusion of the target(s).
如果手术的目的是切除闭塞静脉窦内形成瘘的部分节段，用配以金刚钻的高速磨钻行单侧部分乳突切除术即可。	If the goal of surgery is resection of the fistulous segment of the occluded sinus, a unilateral partial mastoidectomy is completed using a diamond burr mounted a high-speed drill.
需暴露乙状窦外侧和前方的硬脑膜，	This maneuver should expose the dura lateral and anterior to the sigmoid sinus.
在横窦/乙状窦的上方和下方以平行长轴的方向切开硬脑膜，	The dura is incised superior and inferior to the transverse/sigmoid sinuses and parallel to their long axes.
一步步电凝或夹闭供血动脉。	Feeding arteries are coagulated or clipped in a stepwise fashion.
在骨骼化无功能的横窦/乙状窦节段后，用两根缝线穿过天幕以结扎病变的静脉窦节段。	Following skeletonization of the nonfunctional transverse/sigmoid sinus segments, I place two sutures through the tentorium to ligate the target segment of the sinus.
在腰穿逐步引流脑脊液减压后，作者会轻柔地抬起枕叶，牵开小脑。	I gently elevate the occipital lobe and retract the cerebellum after gradual lumbar CSF drainage.
这样可以进一步暴露天幕，以便离断所有向结扎的静脉窦节段供血的血管，并以平行该节段的方向切开天幕。	This maneuver allows me to expose the tentorium further and disconnect all of its feeding vessels to the ligated section of the sinus and cut the tentorium parallel to this section.
这样便可游离病变的硬脑膜窦节段。	This technique releases the isolated pathologic segment of the dural sinus.
应找到并离断所有动脉化的软脑膜静脉。	All arterialized leptomeningeal veins are also found and divided.
需保护未动脉化的Labbe静脉汇入横窦或乙状窦的位置。	The drainage site of the nonarterialized vein of Labbe into the transverse or sigmoid sinus should be protected.
如果Labbe静脉也发生动脉化，应电凝后切断。	If the vein of Labbe is arterialized, it should be coagulated and cut.
更多的细节可参照“硬脑膜动静脉瘘手术原则”章节。	For further details, please refer to the chapter on the Principles of Dural Arteriovenous Fistula Surgery.
· dAVFs是一类复杂的病变，必须对正常和病变动脉与引流静脉的解剖结构形成彻底的认识。	dAVFs are a complex class of pathologies. A thorough understanding of both normal and abnormal arterial and venous anatomy of these lesions is mandatory.
· 需要多学科协作治疗dAVFs，大部分病灶可通过介入手段安全地处理。	A multidisciplinary approach to management of dAVFs is necessary as most lesions are safely treated by means of endovascular intervention.
颈动脉内膜剥脱	Carotid Endarterectomy
颈动脉内膜剥脱术（CEA）是神经外科最精细的手术之一。	Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is one of the most scrutinized surgical procedures in neurosurgery.
大型临床研究结果表明有症状和无症状的颈动脉狭窄患者均可从该手术中明确获益。	Large trials have demonstrated definitive benefit in select patients with both symptomatic and asymptomatic carotid stenosis.
尽管研究CEA对无症状性颈动脉狭窄患者疗效的研究已有很多，其中3项最具有代表性，其结果支持该类患者选择CEA手术。它们是：退伍军人事务合作研究（VA，TheVeterans Administration Cooperative Study ）、无症状颈动脉狭窄外科试验（ACST，The AsymptomaticCarotid Surgery Trial），无症状性颈动脉粥样硬化研究（ACAS，the Asymptomatic CarotidAtherosclerosis Study）。	Although many trials have been conducted about the effect of carotid endarterectomy in asymptomatic patients, three trials (The Veterans Administration Cooperative Study [VA], The Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial [ACST], and the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study [ACAS]) represent the bulk of the data in favor of CEA in this setting.
1、VA研究随机招募了444例颈动脉狭窄在50%-99%之间的无症状男性退伍军人。	VA randomized 444 asymptomatic male veterans with carotid stenosis between 50% and 99%.
所有患者采用常规血管造影诊断并给予阿司匹林治疗。	All patients underwent conventional angiography for diagnosis and were treated with aspirin.
一组患者在服用阿司匹林之外接受CEA手术，而另外一组仅采用药物治疗。	One group underwent CEA in addition to the aspirin, while the other received only medical management.
主要研究终点是同侧神经系统事件。	The primary outcome was an ipsilateral neurologic event.
2、ACAS研究在北美39个医疗中心随机招募了1662名颈动脉狭窄至少60%的无症状患者。	ACAS randomized 1662 asymptomatic patients (over 39 North American centers) who had carotid stenosis of at least 60%.
诊断采用血管造影或者其他无创检查（超声，核磁共振等）。	The diagnosis was made by angiography or other noninvasive tests (ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], etc.).
患者随机分为手术每日阿司匹林治疗组和单独阿司匹林治疗组。	Patients were randomized to surgery and a daily aspirin or to a daily aspirin alone.
手术干预前要求血管造影检查。	Angiography was required before surgical intervention.
主要终点事件包括同侧卒中，围手术期卒中，或死亡。	Primary outcomes included ipsilateral stroke, perioperative stroke, or death.
3、ASCT研究随机招募了3120例颈动脉狭窄至少60%的无症状患者。	ACST randomized 3120 asymptomatic patients with at least 60% carotid stenosis.
和ACAS一样，采用血管造影或者其他诸如超声或者MRI检查明确诊断。	Like ACAS, diagnosis was made via angiography or other tests such as MRI or ultrasonography.
患者随机分为“即刻手术组”或者“药物治疗组”。当“药物治疗组”中患者出现症状时也采用手术治疗。	Patients were randomized into an “immediate surgery” group or a “medical group” in which surgery was performed if the patient became symptomatic.
因此，ACST是评估即刻手术和延迟手术（直至症状出现）差异的一个临床试验研究。	As a result, ACST was a trial that assessed the difference between immediate and delayed (until symptoms develop) surgery.
总的来说，这些临床研究发现CEA手术可使颈动脉狭窄在60%及以上的无症状患者相对风险降低29%。	In summary, these trials demonstrated a 29% relative risk reduction in the surgical group for patients with carotid stenosis of at least 60%.
这一获益的前提条件是手术并发症发生率为3%以内（包括血管造影在内）。	This benefit assumes a 3% rate of surgical complications (including angiography).
在有症状性的颈动脉狭窄患者中进行的研究数据也支持CEA。	The data for symptomatic carotid stenosis also favors carotid endarterectomy in certain groups of patients.
这些数据主要来自于欧洲颈动脉外科试验(ECST，the European Carotid Surgery Trial)和 北美症状性颈动脉狭窄内膜剥脱术试验（NASCE，theNorth American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial ）这两个大型临床试验研究：	These data come from two major trials, the European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST) and the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET):
ECST研究招募了3024例症状性颈动脉狭窄患者，随机分为二个组。	ECST randomized 3024 symptomatic patients to two groups.
一组尽可能快地采用CEA手术。	One group underwent carotid endarterectomy as soon as possible.
另一组尽可能长时间给予最好的药物治疗，直到绝对需要手术时才采用手术治疗。	The other group was given best medical treatment for as long as possible, delaying surgery until absolutely needed.
“症状性”的定义是：患者在入组前6个月内出现有证据的脑缺血事件，且发生在狭窄的颈动脉同侧。	Symptomatic status was granted for patients with evidence of a cerebral ischemic event within 6 months of entry into the study for which the symptoms were ipsilateral to the side of the relevant carotid stenosis.
NASCET研究招募了2926例症状性患者随机分为药物治疗和手术组。	NASCET randomized 2926 symptomatic patients into medical or surgical arms.
入组前4个月内发生在狭窄同侧相关的脑缺血事件被认定是症状性脑缺血事件。	A cerebral ischemic event was considered symptomatic if it occurred ipsilateral to the stenosis in question within 4 months of inclusion into the study.
所有试验数据汇聚到一起都强烈支持颈动脉狭窄70%-99%的症状性患者行CEA治疗。	Pooled together, both trials strongly support endarterectomy for patients with 70% to 99% carotid stenosis.
狭窄程度在50%-69%的症状性患者也建议行CEA，	CEA for symptomatic stenosis between 50% and 69% was also supported, albeit less strongly.
但这一结论需基于手术风险不改变的前提，因为药物治疗组在这一狭窄程度出现主要终点（同侧卒中）的危险度非常低。	This finding was based on the fact that the risk of surgery did not change, whereas the risk of primary outcome (ipsilateral stroke) was less in patients with this degree of stenosis treated in the medical arm.
血管内治疗技术的持续进展将支架成形术引领至潮流。	Continued evolution of endovascular technology has brought stenting of carotid stenosis to the forefront.
然而，大型临床研究并没有证实（尽管这些试验仍在进行中）治疗症状性和无症状性的颈动脉狭窄支架成形优于CEA。	Yet, major trials have not proven (although these trials are still ongoing) these new technologies superior to endarterectomy in the treatment of asymptomatic and symptomatic carotid stenosis.
因此，颈动脉内膜剥脱术仍是脑血管神经外科的重要组成部分；神经外科医师应该保持这一技术应用的持久性。	As a result, carotid endarterectomy remains an important part of cerebrovascular neurosurgery; neurosurgeons should secure the durability of its application.
诊断	Diagnosis
无症状颈动脉狭窄通常是在其他主诉的诊疗过程中顺带发现。	Asymptomatic carotid stenosis is often diagnosed incidentally during diagnostic workup for other complaints.
如部分患者是因为同侧症状性颈动脉狭窄已经确诊后进一步发现对侧病变，	It may be discovered on the contralateral side in a patient who has already been screened for ipsilateral symptomatic carotid stenosis.
部分患者是在治疗短暂性脑缺血和卒中的过程中发现，	It is frequently found during evaluation for transient ischemic attacks and stroke.
也有一部分患者在常规内科检查中发现颈动脉杂音后进一步检查明确诊断。	It may also be detected after a carotid bruit is noted on routine physical examination.
症状性颈动脉狭窄因同侧半球发生脑相关功能区症状而确诊。	Symptomatic carotid stenosis is defined by symptoms in a cerebral territory referable to the ipsilateral hemisphere.
单独的右侧颈动脉狭窄（非优势半球）可能并不是症状性的。	Isolated right (nondominant) carotid stenosis may not become symptomatic.
关于症状的不同形式变化及注意事项的讨论并不在本章的范围之内。	Variations and caveats abound in this discussion and are beyond the scope of this chapter.
一般来说，采用NASCET测量方法能客观地评估狭窄的程度，	In general, the NASCET measurements have been used to objectively determine the extent of stenosis.
狭窄最严重处管腔直径作为分子，在狭窄远端颈膨大以上的颈内动脉直径作为分母。	The diameter of the lumen at the greatest point of stenosis serves as the numerator, while the diameter of the internal carotid artery (ICA) above the bulb and beyond the stenosis serves as the denominator.
ECST测量法是量取狭窄最严重处的管腔直径与该处颈膨大的正常直径之比。	ECST measured the point of greatest stenosis in relation to the diameter of the carotid bulb at the same point as the stenosis.
ECST与NASCET相比通常夸大了狭窄的程度。	ECST measurements often overestimate the same stenosis measured by means of the NASCET criteria.
评估	Evaluation
颈动脉狭窄患者需要完整的医疗评估。	Patients with carotid stenosis require comprehensive medical evaluation.
必须完成颈动脉血管相关的影像学检查，	Imaging of the carotid vasculature is required.
尽管超声对于定期评估和随访监测而言是合理的做法，但通常而言用于手术计划略显不足。	Although ultrasound is a reasonable study for periodic assessment and follow-up/surveillance imaging, it is generally not adequate for surgical planning.
笔者也发现MRA有高估狭窄程度的趋势。	I have also found that MRA has a tendency to overestimate the degree of stenosis.
因此，笔者更愿意选择头颈部CTA或者DSA。	As a result, computed tomography angiogram (CTA) of the head and neck or catheter angiogram are my preferred modes of diagnosis.
颈内动脉颅内段存在串联病变的患者应该被排除在外，因为这些特殊的病例仅用CEA治疗不太可能获益。	The presence of tandem stenoses at the level of the intracranial ICA should be excluded as CEA alone is unlikely to be beneficial in these special cases.
一旦临床检查证实并且获得了合适的影像资料，便可判断出狭窄类型（症状性和无症状性）。	Once the clinical examination has been documented and appropriate imaging has been obtained, a determination of the type of stenosis (symptomatic versus asymptomatic) can be made.
当讨论CEA手术的风险与获益时，这些信息有助于患者咨询和合适的风险分层。	This information allows appropriate risk stratification and patient counseling when discussing the risks and benefits of proceeding with an endarterectomy.
图1. 一例左侧溃疡性、部分钙化的斑块导致颈动脉高度狭窄，术前血管造影（左图）和CTA（右二图箭头）证实。	Figure 1: A high-grade left-sided carotid stenosis caused by an ulcerated, partially calcified plaque is evident on the preoperative catheter (left image) and CT angiogram (right two images-arrows).
手术指征	Indications for the Procedure
如上所述，已发表的文献对于症状性和无症状性患者均支持CEA。	As discussed above, the existing literature supports CEA for both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.
对于症状性患者，狭窄介于50%-99%的患者均推荐CEA治疗，	For symptomatic patients, CEA is advisable for 50% to 99% stenosis.
狭窄程度超过70%的患者获益更多。	Patients with stenosis greater than 70% benefit the most.
目前没有客观数据支持对颈动脉完全闭塞的患者行再通手术，且存在远端栓塞的风险，故而也不推荐使用。	There are no data to support revascularization of a completely occluded carotid artery and is not recommended due to the risk of distal embolization.
无症状性颈动脉狭窄的患者如果狭窄程度大于60%也能从手术中获益。	Patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis can benefit from surgery if they have stenosis greater than 60%.
因为无症状患者从CEA术后2-3年才能从手术中获益，所以手术并非对所有无症状患者均有好处，而应该仔细考虑患者内科合并疾病的相关风险。	Because the benefit of CEA among asymptomatic patients does not favor surgery until 2 to 3 years after intervention, the patients’ medical comorbidities should be carefully considered because CEA may not be beneficial in all asymptomatic patients.
笔者推荐合并内科疾病而无法耐受麻醉的患者进行血管内支架成形术。	I recommend endovascular stenting to patients with medical comorbidities that preclude the use of anesthesia.
但目前尚没有I级证据支持支架成形术优于内膜剥脱手术。	There is no class I evidence to support the superiority of stenting over surgery.
CEA术前有很多细节必须关注。	There are multiple preoperative considerations that must be taken into account before CEA.
颈动脉分叉的高度将决定手术必须显露的范围。	The height of the bifurcation will determine the extent of exposure necessary to complete the operation.
分叉高于C2椎体可能通过颈部切口并不容易显露，因此可以选择血管内治疗。	The bifurcations that are higher than C2 vertebral body may not be readily exposable through the neck incision and endovascular options may be explored.
颈部活动性的评估也应重视。	Assessment of the patient’s neck mobility is important.
术前评估患者颅内血管状态也十分重要，	Preoperative assessment of the patient’s intracranial vasculature is also important.
包括前交通动脉和后交通动脉的评估，它们能提供术中临时阻断ICA后的侧枝血流。	This includes evaluation of the anterior and posterior communicating arteries for providing collateral flow during intraoperative cross-clamping of the ICA.
术前应行基线脑电图检测，这样与术中脑电图对比，可评估是否存在低灌注状态。	Intraoperative electroencephalogram (EEG) is used to assess hypoperfusion and therefore a baseline preoperative EEG may be reasonable.
围手术期阿司匹林应该持续使用。	Aspirin is continued perioperatively.
在围手术期笔者避免使用氯吡格雷，否则会增加术后血肿风险。	I avoid the use of Plavix (clopidogrel) during this period due to the added risk of postoperative hematoma accumulation.
正在服用华法林的患者改为静脉内肝素治疗至凝血酶原时间（PT）正常，	Patients who are on Coumadin are admitted to the hospital and placed on intravenous heparin therapy for normalization of their prothrombin time.
持续使用肝素静脉滴注一直到在手术室内缝合动脉完毕，然后停用肝素48h后重新给予华法林。	Heparin drip is continued until the time of arteriotomy closure in the operating room and withheld for 48 hours, after which Coumadin is reinstituted.
所有患者术前必须进行详细的内科评估，因为很多患者同时罹患冠心病、糖尿病和顽固性高血压。	All patients undergo medical evaluation before surgery because many of them suffer from cardiac disease, diabetes and intractable hypertension.
器械	Instrumentation
有必要准备一套包含所有必须器械专用器械包，这样不同手术团队无需再熟悉在内的器械即可使用。	The use of a single set of instruments that includes all the necessary items, eliminating the need for refamiliarizing the different surgical teams, is essential.
本人专用的器械包包括四个血管镊 （2大2小），专用的分离剪刀，微小环状头端的镊子（从血管壁上清除小斑块），阻断钳，分流钳和持针器。	My particular instrument set includes four (two large and two small) vascular pickups, special dissecting scissors, micro ring-tipped forceps (for cleaning the small flaps from the artery wall), and cross-clamps, shunt clamps, and needle drivers.
有很多商业套装可以满足这个要求。	There are various commercial kits available for this purpose.
CEA手术在颈前三角内进行。	Carotid endarterectomy takes place in the anterior triangle of the neck.
该三角后缘为胸锁乳突肌，前缘为气管食道复合体，三角的底边由位于上方的下颌骨构成。	The borders of this triangle include the sternocleidomastoid muscle posteriorly, the trachea-esophageal complex anteriorly, and the lower border of the mandible superiorly.
三角的顶位于胸锁乳突肌和中线的汇聚点——胸骨上切迹。	The apex is located at the sternal notch where the sternocleidomastoid muscle and midline converge.
有几个解剖关系可指导分离。	There are several anatomical relationships that help guide the dissection.
首先，颈内静脉位于颈动脉外侧。	First, the jugular vein lies lateral to the carotid artery.
如果患者头部向对侧旋转的太多，颈内静脉可能会位于颈动脉上方从而阻挡术野。	If the patient’s head is rotated contralaterally too far, the vein may lie on top of the carotid artery and obstruct the operative corridor.
颈外动脉及其分支的解剖关系是达到合适显露的一个关键标志。	The anatomy of the external carotid artery (ECA) and its branches are the key landmarks for reaching an appropriate exposure.
颈外动脉起于颈总动脉并位于甲状软骨上缘的外侧。	The ECA arises from the common carotid artery (CCA) lateral to the upper border of the thyroid cartilage.
颈外动脉有8个分支，	The ECA has eight branches.
甲状腺上动脉是其第一个分支，舌动脉和面动脉起自颈外动脉的前壁。	The superior thyroid is its first branch, and lingual and facial arteries arise from its anterior surface.
颈外动脉后壁发出枕动脉和耳后动脉，而咽升动脉起自其内壁。	The occipital and posterior auricular arteries arise from its posterior surface, and the ascending pharyngeal artery arises from its medial surface.
颈外动脉在下颌颈水平移行为两个终末支进入腮腺：分别是上颌动脉和颞浅动脉。	The artery ends within the parotid gland at the level of the neck of the mandible by the two terminal branches: maxillary and superficial temporal arteries.
术中有三根神经特别重要。	Three nerves are particularly important during this procedure.
舌下神经在分离的远端跨过颈内动脉且必须被保留。	The hypoglossal nerve crosses the ICA at the distal end of the dissection and must be preserved.
舌下神经损伤是CEA手术中最常见的神经损伤。	Hypoglossal nerve injury is the most common nerve injury during CEA.
当颈动脉分叉过于靠近颅底时，舌下神经损伤风险就增加。	When the ECA-ICA bifurcation his located too cranially, the risk of hypoglossal injury increases.
舌下神经定位可以通过向上追踪颈袢（由C1-C3发出的神经根组成，译者注）识别，就在颈袢加入舌下神经时即可明确其定位走形。	The location of the hypoglossal nerve can be discerned by pursuing the ansa cervicalis superiorly where it joins the hypoglossal nerve.
最后，迷走神经走形在颈动脉鞘内，通常沿鞘后外侧壁走形并位于颈动脉和颈内静脉的后方。	Finally, the vagus nerve runs within the carotid sheath, typically along its posterolateral aspect and behind the carotid artery and jugular vein.
小心打开颈动脉鞘可轻柔的向外后方松解该神经。	Careful dissection of the sheath allows gentle release of this nerve laterally and posteriorly.
颈动脉分叉水平变化不定；但是，它一般位于第三第四颈椎水平，分离切开的范围必须根据颈动脉狭窄的长度决定。	The level of the carotid bifurcation is variable; however, it generally lies at the level of the third or fourth cervical vertebra, and the length of the stenosis greatly affects the extent of the necessary dissection.
图2.CEA相关的颈部血管神经关系。	Figure 2: The relationship between the vasculature and the nerves in the neck as related to CEA are summarized.
迷走神经位于颈动脉深面，舌下神经跨过颈内动脉和颈外动脉远端。	The vagus nerve lies deep to the carotid artery and the hypoglossal nerve crosses the ECA and distal ICA.
如果术者在早期分离阶段尚未显露颈动脉鞘时迷失了方向并持续在咽部肌肉内向中线过多的分离（经常是因为头部过度旋转导致），极有可能出现术后吞咽障碍。	If the operator is disoriented early in dissection before exposure of the carotid sheath and continues dissection more toward the midline (most often related to too much head turn) onto the pharyngeal muscles, postoperative swallowing difficulty is likely.
向外侧沿胸锁乳突肌内侧肌腹进一步分离，注意避免损伤颈内静脉，即可重新获得定位，避免这一并发症。	This complication should be avoided by lateral redirection of the dissection along the medial belly of the sternocleidomastoid muscle without injuring the jugular vein.
图3.将颈内静脉轻柔的向外侧牵拉显露颈动脉分叉。	Figure 3: Gentle lateral mobilization of the internal jugular vein exposes the carotid bifurcation.
颈外动脉的分支，包括甲状腺上动脉、舌动脉、面动脉均已标记。	Branches of the ECA, including the superior thyroid artery, lingual, and facial arteries are marked.
注意到迷走神经有一定的移位，应该小心沿着颈内动脉和颈内静脉前方仔细检查。	Note that the vagus nerve can have a wandering route and should be carefully watched for along the anterior ICA and the jugular vein.
颈内动脉大约在10%的患者位于颈外动脉的内侧；这一解剖变异应该在术前影像上认识并且在手术时沿颈内动脉内侧分离。	In about 10% of patients, the ICA is medial to the ECA; this anatomical variant should be recognized on preoperative imaging and surgical dissection should be directed medial to the ECA.
在这样的病例中术者没有理由混淆颈内颈外动脉的判断。	There is no reason for the operator to confuse the ICA for ECA in these cases.
颈动脉内膜剥脱术	CAROTID ENDARTERECTOMY
患者仰卧于手术床，在双侧肩部下横向放置一个肩垫。	The patient is positioned supine on the operating room table with a shoulder roll (bump) laid transversely under the shoulders.
这一操作使颈部轻度过伸并以此打开下巴和锁骨之间的手术空间。	This maneuver provides for gentle neck extension to open the operative space between the chin and clavicle.
可用一条布带轻轻的牵拉下颌，有利于增加显露，特别对于颈动脉分叉或者斑块位置比较高的病例而言。	A piece of tape may be used to provide gentle traction on the mandible, allowing for increased exposure, especially in cases involving high bifurcations or plaques.
患者头部向手术对侧轻度的旋转有助于颈前三角的显露。	A slight turn of the patient’s head toward the opposite side can help expose the anterior triangle of the neck.
这一旋转不要超过20度，因为过度的旋转将移动胸锁乳突肌覆盖在颈动脉鞘上并干扰颈动脉的显露。	This turn should not be more than 20 degrees because further turn will move the sternocleidomastoid muscle over the carotid sheath and interfere with the exposure.
图4. 胸锁乳突肌和颈内静脉的解剖关系是到达颈动脉的关键标识。	Figure 4: The anatomic relationship between the sternocleidomastoid muscle and jugular vein is the key landmark for reaching the carotid arteries.
面神经的下颌缘支在分离和牵拉下颌角周围的软组织时尤其危险。	The marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve is especially at risk during dissection and retraction of the soft tissues around the angle of the mandible.
该支神经麻痹会导致受累侧下嘴唇高度抬高，术后微笑不对称。	Its palsy will lead to an asymmetrical postoperative smile upon elevation of the lower lip on the affected side.
但是这种面肌力弱是暂时的。	This weakness is temporary.
切口和初始显露	Incision and the Initial Exposure
胸锁乳突肌如其名字一样附着在相应部位，每一个附着点均有重要意义。	The attachments of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) are betrayed by its name and each serves an important purpose.
触诊并确定乳突尖，如果需要更高位置的显露，乳突尖代表着切口延长的方向。	The mastoid tip should be palpated and represents the direction in which the incision may be extended if higher exposure is needed.
应该通过体表标志估计分叉的位置和必须显露的范围（根据斑块的位置和长度）。	The level of the bifurcation and necessary exposure (based on the location and length of the plaque) may be estimated via surface landmarks.
甲状软骨大约在C4-5水平。	The thyroid cartilage approximates the level of C4-5.
几乎所有的分叉都位于甲状软骨之上，因此切口应该超过甲状软骨。	Since almost all bifurcations occur above this level, the incision should travel above it.
下颌角和舌骨大约在C3，下牙代表C2水平。	The angle of the mandible and the hyoid bone approximate C3, while the inferior teeth represent C2.
CEA手术切口通常根据下方斑块的定位来确定。	The incision for a carotid endarterectomy is often tailored to the location of the underlying plaque.
低分叉且斑块局限通常采用颈部皮纹横切口可增加术后美容效果。	Low bifurcations with focal plaques often lend themselves well to transverse incisions along the creases of the neck to enhance cosmesis.
这种切口类似于颈椎前路椎间盘切除术的手术切口。	This type of incision is similar to the incision used for an anterior cervical discectomy procedure.
如果颈动脉分叉病变严重，有一长段斑块，或者分叉位于颈前三角较高位置通常需要更多的显露范围。	Carotid bifurcations often require more exposure if they are significantly diseased, have a long segment of plaque, or are higher within the anterior triangle of the neck.
可以通过沿胸锁乳突肌前缘的轻度弧形或直切口来完成。	This can be accomplished through a slightly curved or straight incision along the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
笔者切开皮肤前采用皮下注射1%的利多卡因和1：10万肾上腺素进行局部麻醉和止血。	I use a subcutaneous injection of 1% lidocaine with 1:100000 epinephrine for local anesthesia and hemostasis before the incision.
图5：一个纵行切口从恰位于下颌角上延伸至恰位于甲状软骨下，并且沿胸锁乳突肌前缘走形（上图）。	Figure 5: A vertical incision is made extending from just above the angle of the mandible to just below the thyroid cartilage, along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (top image).
切口可以根据分叉的水平扩大向下低至胸骨上切迹，向上高达耳后区。	The incision may be enlarged as low as the suprasternal notch and as high as the retroauricular region, depending on the level of the bifurcation.
切口应远离下颌角来减少面神经下颌缘支的损伤。	The incision should not closely approach the angle of the mandible to decrease the risk of marginal mandibular branch injury.
标记下颌角和胸骨切迹。	The angle of the mandible and the sternal notch are marked (bottom photo).
注意患者颈部的轻度旋转。	Note the slight rotation of the patient’s neck.
图6.开始切开不宜过深，仅仅达到颈阔肌层面。	Figure 6: The initial incision is shallow, taken down only to the level of the platysma muscle.
然后，沿切口进一步切开皮下组织和颈阔肌。	Next, the subcutaneous tissue and platysma are divided parallel to the incision.
笔者使用10#皮刀切断颈阔肌，这里很多术者采用组织剪（Metzenbaum）游离肌肉和下层黏连之后再横形切断。	I use a #10 scalpel-size knife to transect the platysma, whereas most operators use the spreading motion of the Metzenbaum scissors to free the muscle from any underlying attachments before its transection.
单极电凝可用于切断游离的肌肉，但是应避免损伤下方的静脉。	Monopolar electrocautery is used to transect the mobilized muscle while avoiding any damage to the underlying veins.
通常颈外静脉恰好位于颈阔肌下方，需要缝扎后切断；忽视这一静脉会导致明显的静脉性出血。	Often the external jugular vein lies just beneath the platysma and may require suture ligation; ignoring this vein can lead to brisk venous bleeding.
颈横神经在上述过程中被切断。	The transverse cervical nerve is transected in the above process.
这一操作会导致颈前区持续3-6月的麻木。	This maneuver leads to numbness over the anterior neck area that resolves in 3-6 months.
一旦颈阔肌被切开，应该识别胸锁乳突肌前缘。	Once the platysma is divided, the anterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle should be discernible.
沿着胸锁乳突肌内侧肌腹在软组织平面内分离；笔者追踪该肌肉内侧面并轻轻的将胸锁乳突肌翻向外侧。	The dissection proceeds in the soft tissue plane along the medial belly of the sternocleidomastoid muscle; I follow the medial surface of this muscle while gently reflecting the muscle laterally.
如果没有沿肌肉内侧面而在颈部四处分离并深入颈部，就会损伤喉返神经（位于气管食管沟内）及潜在的咽肌损伤而导致吞咽障碍。	Wandering dissection deep to the neck region while not pursuing the medial surface of the muscle leads to swallowing dysfunction caused by injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve (located in the trachea-esophageal groove) and potentially pharyngeal muscles.
图7. 在轻度外翻及牵拉胸锁乳突肌后，笔者沿着该肌肉内侧面触诊软组织判断颈动脉的搏动和定位。	Figure 7: Upon gentle lateral reflection and retraction of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, I palpate the soft tissues along the medial aspect of its belly for the pulse and the location of the carotid artery.
注意触诊的方向仅沿肌肉的内表面（上图）。	Note the direction of the palpation just along the medial surface of the muscle (top image).
在胸锁乳突肌和中线吞咽肌群间软组织的分离平面识别颈内静脉。	Division of the soft tissue planes between the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the midline swallowing muscles identifies the jugular vein.
可能需要鱼钩牵开器扩大这个平面，但是要避免鱼钩或者牵开器的叶片伤及喉返神经或者食道（下图）。	Fish-hook retractors may be employed to expand this plane, but the recurrent laryngeal nerve or the esophagus should not be injured by the hooks or retractor blades (bottom image).
图8. 接下来，在平行于胸锁乳突肌内侧面的潜在间隙内钝性分离显露面总静脉（上图）。	Figure 8: During the next step, blunt dissection within the potential space parallel to the medial surface of the sternocleidomastoid muscle exposes the common facial vein (top image).
在术野的这部分内可见大的静脉分支汇入颈内静脉；这些静脉中的最粗大的一支就是面总静脉。	Large venous tributaries may join the jugular vein within this part of the operative field; the most dominant of these veins is the common facial vein.
因为颈内静脉必须向外侧移动，所以需要切断这些静脉。	The jugular vein must be mobilized laterally, requiring division of these veins.
大的分支需要用2-0的丝线缝扎（下图）。	Large tributaries require suture ligation via 2-0 silk sutures (bottom image).
一旦颈内静脉被游离，笔者将切断的静脉断端放置在牵开器叶片或鱼钩下方牵拉颈内静脉来显露颈动脉鞘。	Once freed, I use the stump of the transected vein(s) underneath the retractor blades or fish-hooks to displace the jugular vein and expose the carotid sheath.
鱼钩或者叶片不要直接损伤大静脉。	The hooks or blades should not directly injure the large vein.
所有的神经包括颈袢均在颈内静脉的内侧而被保护。	All the nerves medial to the jugular vein, including the ansa cervicalis, are preserved.
显露颈动脉	Exposure of the Carotid Artery
笔者采用剪刀钝性分离颈内静脉和颈动脉之间的软组织平面，向外侧移动颈内静脉，直到颈动脉鞘完全打开。	Using the spreading action of the scissors, I dissect the soft tissue planes between the jugular vein and the carotid artery, laterally mobilize the jugular vein, and unveil the carotid sheath.
继续采用扁桃体钳钝性分离并进一步游离颈动脉鞘；将颈动脉鞘锐性垂直切开显露下方的颈动脉。	Continued spreading dissection using a Tonsil clamp further isolates the carotid sheath; its sharp vertical incision exposes the underlying carotid artery.
应该在这一分离阶段辨认清楚颈袢和迷走神经。	Two nerves, the ansa cervicalis and the vagus nerve, should be identified during this dissection process.
迷走神经通常沿着颈动脉外侧深面（在颈动脉和颈内静脉之间的沟内），但是也会移位。	The vagus nerve usually travels along the deep and lateral surface of the carotid artery (in the groove between the carotid artery and jugular vein), but can have wandering routes.
不管它是如何走行，笔者并不分离该神经，但是一些术者建议将迷走神经从内侧附着处游离，这样它可以随着颈内静脉被拉向外侧。	Regardless, I do not dissect the nerve, but some operators advise its mobilization free from its medial attachments so that it may be released laterally with the jugular vein.
颈袢作为舌下神经的定位标志，可以沿颈动脉顺颈袢向上追踪。	The ansa cervicalis can be pursued superiorly, along with the carotid artery itself, serving as a roadmap to the location of the hypoglossal nerve.
图9.打开颈动脉鞘的示意图（上图）。	Figure 9: Division of the carotid sheath is illustrated (top image).
打开颈动脉鞘后，采用扁桃体钳沿颈动脉四周钝性游离。	Next, the carotid artery is dissected circumferentially free of its sheath using the continuous spreading action of a Tonsil clamp.
面总静脉，颈袢和舌下神经被显示（下图）。	The common facial vein, ansa cervicalis, and the hypoglossal nerve are depicted (lower photo).
目标是保留正常的解剖结构。	Preservation of the normal anatomy is the goal.
颈动脉鞘打开后开始显露颈总动脉（CCA）。	The dissection of the carotid sheath begins with the exposure of the common carotid artery (CCA).
根据分叉的不同高度，显露CCA可能需要牵拉（通过张力缝合）或者分离肩胛舌骨肌。	Depending on the level of the bifurcation, this exposure may require retraction (by way of a retention suture) or division of the omohyoid muscle.
颈内动脉(ICA)远端的分离将显露舌下神经。	Distal dissection of the internal carotid artery (ICA) will expose the hypoglossal nerve.
当有足够的空间进行动脉切开、血管圈套、恰好在ICA斑块远端以上放置一个低夹闭力的哈巴狗夹以及在CCA近端放置血管夹（大的Fogarty软钳口衬垫型弹簧夹），这时就算是达到了足够的分离（通常可用临时阻断夹来代替，译者注）。	Enough dissection has been established when there is adequate room for the arteriotomy, vessel loop, and a small low closing force bulldog clamp around the ICA just above the border of the plaque, and a vessel clamp (large soft-shoe Fogarty vascular clamp) around the CCA.
依据斑块的长度（用湿润的手指轻轻的触诊动脉壁来确定）进一步明确合适的显露范围。	The length of the plaque (determined through gentle palpation of the arterial wall using a moistened finger) also affects the extent of appropriate exposure.
沿颈内动脉前方进一步分离。	The dissection continues along the anterior aspect of the ICA.
斑块的位置和长度可能要求更头侧的显露；必须小心避免损伤舌下神经。	The length and location of the plaque may dictate more rostral exposure; care must be taken to avoid injuring the hypoglossal nerve.
如上所述，颈袢可作为定位舌下神经的向导。	As stated above, the ansa cervicalis can serve as a guide to the location of the hypoglossal nerve.
舌下神经一如既往地位于ICA头侧并直接跨过，且以正交的方式跨血管向下颌走行。	The hypoglossal nerve is typically located along and directly over the rostral ICA, crossing this artery in an orthogonal direction as the nerve proceeds toward the mandible.
如果有必要向头端移动舌下神经，可以在颈袢加入舌下神经处将其横断以便松解舌下神经。	If rostral mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve is necessary, the ansa cervicalis can be transected where it joins the hypoglossal nerve to untether the latter nerve.
然后用血管圈套带牵拉舌下神经。	The hypoglossal nerve is then retracted using a vessel loop.
胸锁乳突肌的ECA来源的小动脉分支很少需要电凝后切断，来增加舌下神经的游离移位。	A small arterial branch of the ECA to the sternocleidomastoid muscle rarely requires coagulation and transection to facilitate adequate mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve.
如果必须达到高位显露，可以切断二腹肌后腹，这样也没有任何不良后果。	If a high exposure is mandatory, the posterior belly of the digastric muscle may be transected without any untoward consequences.
笔者几乎不用25G针头注射大约2ml1%的利多卡因至颈动脉窦，而仅当血管操作导致明显的血流动力学不稳定和分叉部夹层时采用。	I rarely inject the carotid sinus with approximately 2cc of 1% Xylocaine using a 25-gauge needle, only if significant hemodynamic instability during vessel manipulation and dissection in the region of the bifurcation are noted.
这一操作的益处仍有争议。	The benefits of this maneuver are debated.
最后，在ECA近端根部环形游离。	Lastly, the ECA is exposed circumferentially around its proximal end.
与另外两根动脉的处理不一样，ECA只需要在分叉部以远环形游离一小段即可。	Unlike the other two arteries, only a small segment of the ECA, just distal to the bifurcation, should be released.
应该同时识别甲状腺上动脉。	This maneuver includes identification of the superior thyroid artery.
因为咽升动脉经常不能在术野直接看见，所以这一有限的显露使咽升动脉保留在显露的ECA以远的组织内，围绕ECA放置血管圈套或者动脉夹时可将咽升动脉排除在血运循环以外。	This limited exposure ensures that the ascending pharyngeal artery, not often directly visualized within the operative field, will be gathered up in the tissue distal to the ECA exposure and will, therefore, be excluded from the circulation when a clamp or vessel loop is placed around the ECA.
动脉切开前的分离	Prearteriotomy Dissection
简单地显露颈动脉的主要三段是不够的。	It is not enough to simply expose the three major segments of the carotid artery.
一旦它们的上表面游离，重要的是CCA，ICA，ECA环形游离。	Once dissected on their superficial surface, circumferential isolation of the CCA, ICA and ECA is important.
环形分离能使术者有机会旋转动脉（如果需要）以更好一些的角度来切开动脉。	Such circumferential dissection provides the operator with an opportunity to rotate the artery (if needed) into a more favorable angle for the arteriotomy.
这样的游离也允许夹闭时牵引血管，确保血管完整的被阻断夹夹闭和血管圈套带环形包绕，同时不会误将包括迷走神经在内的其他结构包绕在内导致损伤。	It also allows for manipulation of the artery during clamping, ensuring that the entire vessel is included within the clamp and the vessel loops are encircling the artery without placing other structures, including the vagus nerve, at risk.
喉上神经位于ICA远端深面，它不应该在分离时被意外损伤。	The superior laryngeal nerve is situated deep to the distal ICA and should not be accidentally damaged during dissection.
在动脉环形孤立后，血管圈套带在每一根主要血管分支上缠绕二圈，用小的扁桃体钳固定圈套带，使动脉处于无张力且无粘连的悬挂状态。	Following circumferential isolation of the arteries, vessel loops are wrapped twice around each major arterial branch, secured using small Tonsil clamps under no tension and not attached to the drapes.
笔者习惯放置一个长的直动脉瘤夹临时阻断甲状腺上动脉。	I typically place a long straight aneurysm clip on the superior thyroid artery.
哪怕CCA、ICA、ECA都已做好准备放置最后的阻断夹，笔者也要花一些时间来讨论下一步必要的一些措施：监测脑电图，交代手术室巡回护士静脉内给予肝素。	Even though the CCA, ICA and ECA are ready for the placement of their final occluding clamps, I take a moment and discuss the next steps regarding necessary instruments, EEG monitoring, and administration of intravenous heparin with the rest of the operating room staff.
可以用Rummel止血带缠绕CCA并用橡皮带牵拉。	A Rummel tourniquet may be used around the CCA and pulled through a rubber sleeve.
如果需要使用转流管时，Rummel止血带可使血管壁固定在腔内分流管上，	This maneuver allows constriction of the vessel around an intraluminal shunt, should the need arises.
蚊式钳夹持血管圈套带或者Rummel止血带末端悬挂在牵开器手柄上。	Mosquito clamps on the ends of the vessel loops or Rummel tourniquet hang over the retractor handles.
图10. 笔者平行于ICA轴线切开颈动脉鞘，将动脉鞘外缘用鱼钩或者缝四针牵拉维持一定的张力。	Figure 10: I incise the carotid sheath parallel to the axis of the ICA and place the lateral edges of the sheath under tension using the fish-hooks or four sutures.
这一关键操作会将ICA从颈动脉沟内抬起，这样ICA更接近术者，能显著改善后面操作和手术的角度。	This key maneuver elevates the ICA out of its groove closer to the surgeon, and remarkably eases the later steps and working angles of the operation.
长的血管夹（长的动脉瘤夹或者哈巴狗夹）放置在颈内动脉血管圈套带以远，Fogarty 血管夹放置在颈总动脉内斑块以近。	Long vascular clamps (long aneurysm clips or bulldog clamps) are placed distal to the vessel loops on the ICA, and a Fogarty vascular clamp is placed on the CCA proximal to the plaque.
颈内动脉上的血管圈套带固定住其远端血管夹。	The vessel loops on the ICA hold the ICA clamp in position.
放置一根血管圈套带足以闭塞颈外动脉。	A vessel loop on the ECA is adequate for its occlusion.
首先夹闭颈内动脉。	The ICA is occluded first.
根据患者的体重计算，常用的肝素剂量在5000-8000u。	Typical heparin doses range from 5000 to 8000 units, depending on the patient’s weight.
在阻断血管之前3-5分钟给药可以确保肝素有足够的起效时间。	Adequate time (3-5 minutes) is allowed to ensure the drug reaches its effect before the clamps are applied.
应该保证转流管处于备用状态。	A vascular shunt should be available.
另外，这是也应该准备好显微镜。	Additionally, the microscope should be draped during this time.
笔者更喜欢在手术的下一个阶段使用显微镜，包括动脉切开、斑块剥离和血管缝合。	I prefer to use the microscope for the next stages of the operation, including the arteriotomy, plaque dissection, and vessel closure.
尽管使用显微镜会增加手术时间，但是改善的视野会带来更有效的斑块去除和更理想的血管缝合。	Although its use adds time to the procedure, the improved visualization leads to more effective plaque removal and desirable arteriotomy closure.
动脉切开	Arteriotomy
显微镜下，长的动脉瘤夹或小的哈巴狗夹放置在ICA远端，并位于相应的血管圈套带以远。	Under the microscope, a long aneurysm clip or small bulldog clamp is placed on the distal ICA, distal to the corresponding vascular loop.
阻断的血管包括病变血管全段和一小段正常的血管在内，此时血管夹的放置才最合适；必须显露一小段正常血管，这样就可以避免随后动脉切开达不到到最满意的长度。	Placement is adequate if the entire section of the diseased vessel and a short length of normal vessel are available for the endarterectomy; the exposure of this short length of normal vessel is imperative to avoid suboptimal arterectomy during the later stages of the operation.
向手术团队宣布动脉夹闭并开始计时。	This clamping is announced to the operating room team and timing begins.
CCA、ECA包括甲状腺上动脉也被夹闭。	The CCA and ECA as well as the superior thyroid artery are also occluded.
脑电图记录的任何改变都要求即刻的关注，它有可能提示需要放置转流管。	Any alterations in EEG recordings require immediate attention and may indicate the need for a vascular shunt.
然而，大多数时候提升大约20%的收缩压都能消除或缓解脑电图的改变。	However, most often, an increase in systolic blood pressure of approximately 20% will relieve the EEG changes.
如果血压的提升不足以缓解脑电图的改变，分别在斑块近端的CCA和斑块远端的ICA各放置一血管夹。	If an increase in blood pressure is inadequate to address the EEG concerns, a vascular clamp is then placed within the CCA and ICA, proximal and distal to the plaque, respectively.
ECA和甲状腺上动脉需要一个血管圈套带或者再来一个夹闭力更强的动脉瘤夹。	Either a vascular loop or a second more robust aneurysm clip can be used to occlude the ECA and superior thyroid artery.
放置转流管时，首先在CCA上开孔，然后将转流管插入管腔后用Rummel止血带收紧固定；用蚊式钳固定橡胶带在位。	For placement of the shunt, the ICA is cannulated first, and the shunt is secured in place by pulling up on vessel loops; a mosquito clamp is used to hold the rubber sleeve in place.
用大血管钳夹闭转流管，	The shunt tubing is collapsed via heavy vascular forceps.
短暂释放血管钳排空转流管内气体。	The tubing is then cleared of air by briefly releasing the vascular forceps.
接下来再移除ICA上的哈巴狗夹后将转流管远端置入ICA远端管腔内。	Next, the distal end of the shunt is placed within the lumen of the CCA while the bulldog clamp on the CCA is removed.
将转流管进一步插入并用血管圈套带或者专用瘤夹将其固定在ICA远端。	The shunt is then advanced into the CCA as the vessel loops or a custom clamp secures the shunt in place (Please see below).
图11.紧接着采用11号刀片紧贴斑块近端切开颈总动脉。	Figure 11: Next, the arteriotomy is made using a #11 scalpel in the CCA, just proximal to the plaque.
这一操作必须避免损伤动脉后壁。	It is imperative to avoid injury to the back wall of the artery during this maneuver.
任何血管后壁损伤都需要修复并显著增加血管阻断时间。	Any such injury requires a repair of the tear and significantly lengthens the clamp time.
如果可以看到管腔内活动性出血，检查血管阻断夹的闭合、血管圈套带的张力及牵引确保没有返流血。	If continuous bleeding within the lumen is noted, the closure of the clamps and tension/traction of the vessel loops should be inspected to ensure absence of back flow.
通常在颈外动脉上的圈套带需要增加牵引力。	Most often, the traction on the vessel loop on the ECA needs to be increased.
管腔内出血的其他常见原因包括咽升动脉出血。通常是一支大的咽升动脉没有被排除在夹闭的颈外动脉之外。	Other common causes of intraluminal bleeding include a large ascending pharyngeal artery that was not excluded with the rest of the ECA circulation.
更有甚者的是ICA的阻断夹不够紧或者血管夹闭不全。	Moreover, the ICA clamp may not be tight enough or not spanning all the way across the vessel.
与其猜测原因，不如逐一拉紧每一根血管圈套带来判断出血的来源。	Rather than guessing, each vessel loop should be individually tightened, one at a time, to identify which artery is the source of bleeding.
图12.用带角度的pott’s剪刀沿斑块全长完全打开动脉。	Figure 12: Potts angled scissors are used to complete the arteriotomy through the full extent of the plaque.
动脉应该沿ICA和分叉的中轴直线切开。	The arteriotomy should be in line with the center of the bifurcation and ICA.
需注意的是：动脉切开在分叉部起始部容易倾向内侧，而在ICA远端容易转向外侧。	There is a tendency to steer toward the bifurcation initially, and toward the lateral side of the ICA more distally.
动脉切开越沿中轴进行，血管壁缝合时就越容易。	The more centered the arteriotomy is, the easier will be the performance of the arterial wall closure.
动脉切开的路线可以用无菌标记笔事先描记。	The arteriotomy route may be marked using a sterile marking pen.
因为剪刀可能无法有效剪开钙化斑块，因此斑块钙化便是一个棘手的问题。	Calcified plaques can create a special challenge because the scissors may be ineffective.
在这种情况下，笔者采用11号刀片小心切开斑块。	In these situations, I use a #11 scalpel to carefully cut and break through the plaque.
剪刀无法通过的极度狭窄的动脉同样也是难点之一，	Extremely stenotic arteries may present a similar challenge because the scissors’ blades may not have enough space to transverse through the stenotic lumen.
这时11号刀片也许同样有用。	The #11 scalpel can also be effective under these circumstances.
动脉切开必须延续到ICA远端的斑块以远。	It is imperative for the arteriotomy to reach above the plaque in the distal ICA.
内膜切除	Endarterectomy
理想的斑块分离从颈总动脉切开的近端起点开始。	Dissection of the plaque ideally begins at the proximal end of the arteriotomy within the CCA.
也可以从斑块和正常内膜外膜之间容易识别的平面开始。	It can also begin wherever there is an easily identifiable plane between the plaque and healthy intima and adventitia.
笔者经常沿着一个平面连续分离；当这一平面变得十分困难而无法保持时，转向另一个位点开始分离并随后与第一个分离平面会师。	I often continue dissecting along one plane; when this plane becomes more difficult to maintain, I switch to another site for the endarterectomy and meet my initial dissection plane later.
应该避免在动脉壁内过度分离，因为这样会损伤并撕裂内膜。	Aggressive dissection within the arterial wall should be avoided to prevent intimal injuries and tears.
图13.动脉壁在斑块处因明显炎症反应而极端菲薄，所以需要万分小心地将内膜外膜的正常部分保留。	Figure 13: Great care is taken to leave the normal portion of the intima and adventitia intact because the arterial wall can be extremely thin where there is a significant inflammatory response to the atherosclerotic plaque.
主刀医生夹持同侧的外膜，而助手夹持斑块完成斑块的分离。	Dissection is accomplished with the surgeon holding the ipsilateral adventitia while the assistant holds the plaque.
应该围绕斑块环形游离（插入图）。	Dissection should occur circumferentially around the plaque (inset).
斑块逐渐变小，在其终末端突然截断，而在颈内动脉远端和颈总动脉留下相对正常的内膜。	Progressively, the plaque is truncated sharply at its distal end, leaving relatively normal intima in the distal CCA and ICA.
图14.颈总动脉近端斑块末端横断后留下松散的内膜瓣，因为血流方向的原因，颈总动脉的内膜瓣不太可能影响血流，但是颈内动脉远端的内膜瓣则恰好相反。	Figure 14: Although the loose intimal flaps on the arterial wall at the proximal truncated CCA end of the plaque are unlikely to be a problem because of the direction of blood flow, the same cannot be said for the flaps that are located at the distal end of the arteriotomy within the ICA.
因此，斑块远端必须小心截断，并且用剪刀在放大视野下修剪。	Therefore, the distal end of the plaque must be carefully truncated and small free flaps sharply trimmed using microscissors under microscopic magnification.
ICA远端斑块消失、相对正常的内膜出现时分离长度就足够了，	The extent of dissection is adequate distally when the plaque is traversed and relatively normal intima is encountered.
斑块与颈内动脉远端内膜通常有一个自然界限，此处轻轻的牵拉斑块就可达到斑块和内膜的自然分离。	There is often a natural line within the ICA where the plaque tends to disconnect itself spontaneously upon gentle traction on the plaque.
图15.在斑块远端分离后，笔者继续使用pott’s剪刀离断颈总动脉和斑块近端。	Figure 15. After freeing the plaque distally, I continue the dissection into the CCA and the proximal end of the plaque is disconnected using the Potts scissors.
一般来说，斑块会向近心端延续，因此必须在动脉切口的下端切断斑块。	Naturally, the plaque continues into the heart, and therefore a decision must be made to disconnect the plaque at the lower end of the arteriotomy.
几乎不可能在颈总动脉内看到一个清晰的斑块像羽毛尖一样逐渐狭小的末端。	It is almost impossible to create a clean feathering away of the plaque in the CCA.
图16.一旦斑块的近端和远端均已游离，那么它仅在颈外动脉内保持附着。	Figure 16: Once freed from its distal and proximal ends, the only remaining attachment is within the ECA.
在颈外动脉内环形游离一小段斑块后，斑块一直到其自然分离的末端可以被撕裂从而简单地从ECA内拖出。	After a short segment of the plaque into the ECA is circumferentially exposed, the plaque can simply be pulled away and avulsed from its attachment in the ECA until it is naturally disconnected.
这一步骤就像将袜子从鞋子里拖出来一样。	This step is often likened to the appearance of a sock being rolled off the foot.
ECA开口处的微小斑块要仔细清理，因为颈外动脉近端形成血栓能进一步增大并进入颈内动脉最终导致脑血管栓塞。	The inlet into the ECA has to properly dissected of minor plaque as any thrombus in the proximal ECA can propagate into the ICA and lead to cerebral embolization.
必要时可以沿颈外动脉进一步切开。	If necessary, the arteriotomy may be extended along the wall of the ECA.
图17.一旦移除斑块，小心检查保留的内膜表面，用末端是显微圆环的镊子移除所有松散的内膜碎片。	Figure 17: Once the plaque is removed, the remaining intimal surface is carefully inspected and all loose pieces of the intima are removed using micro-ring tipped forceps.
用肝素生理盐水冲洗显露内膜游离瓣。	Heparin and saline irrigation are used to expose the fine free flaps.
这些漂浮的内膜瓣应该沿动脉内壁向切口处完整撕下。	The flaps should be stripped away along the entire width of the artery toward the edge of the arteriotomy.
在动脉切开的远端应该避免过度的分离这些瓣膜，这样有可能导致内膜损伤延伸到显露并切开的动脉以远。	Overzealous dissection of the flaps at the distal end of the endarterectomy must be avoided for the fear of extending the intimal damage above the level of the exposure/arteriotomy.
分离的内膜游离瓣沿着颈内动脉远端延伸到动脉切开以上水平是一个棘手的问题。	Extending the dissection of the free intimal flaps beyond the arteriotomy along the distal ICA can be problematic.
因此，后壁和侧壁上的内膜瓣必要时可用双针未编制缝线（6-0普瑞林）缝合。	Therefore, back-wall and side-wall flaps should be tacked down with a double-armed unbraided suture (6-0 prolene) if rarely necessary.
双针都必须从内向外，这样线结位于血管腔外。	Both needles must be directed inside to outside so that the knot is tied on the external surface of the vessel.
如果没有这样修理内膜，一旦前向血流再通，患者就处于动脉夹层的风险之中。	Without this repair, the patient is at risk for arterial dissection once anterograde flow is re-established.
而动脉前壁上的内膜瓣可以在缝合血管壁时同时封闭。	Front-wall flaps, on the other hand, can be incorporated into the arterial wall closure.
血管缝合	Closure of the Arteriotomy
血管缝合采用6-0的单针缝线从远端开始连续缝合（粗大的血管也可选择5-0缝线）。	Closure of the arteriotomy commences distally with a single-armed 6-0 prolene suture (5-0 may also be selected for larger arteries) in a running fashion.
如前所述，前壁内膜瓣必须一起缝合在针脚内避免动脉夹层。	As discussed above, front-wall intimal flaps must be included within the stitch to avoid arterial dissection.
从远向近地缝合至血管切开长度的一半或2/3，一个好的缝合必须能够封闭双侧针脚同时将动脉切开的不规则边缘排除在管腔之外。	The closure is performed from distal to proximal for about one-half to two-thirds of the arteriotomy. A healthy bite of the arterial wall should be taken on both sides to ensure that the stitch will hold and the irregular edge of the arteriotomy is not exposed to the lumen.
针脚边距不应该太大，特别是在颈内动脉远端避免不必要的管腔缩窄。	The bite should not be too large, however, to avoid unnecessary constriction of the new lumen, especially at the level of the distal ICA.
如果动脉壁明显外翻则说明边距太宽。	If the arterial walls are significantly everted, the bites are too big.
大多数病例中，管腔缩窄到直径甚至小于斑块移除之前的可能性很小，尤其在颈总动脉和分叉部更是如此。	In most cases, the likelihood that the lumen will be constricted beyond a diameter smaller than the original lumen prior to plaque removal is low, especially at the level of the bifurcation and CCA.
图18.用6-0的普瑞林从远端开始连续缝合动脉壁。	Figure 18: The arterial wall closure begins distally using a 6-0 prolene running suture.
前壁内膜瓣应该包含在针脚内避免动脉夹层。	Front-wall intimal flaps should be included within the stitch to avoid arterial dissection.
颈内动脉远端起始几针应该采用两次穿针技术（从外到内，再从内到外，插入图），	The suturing technique for the first few sutures along the ICA should be conducted with two passes of the needle (outside-in and inside-out, inset image).
这一操作保证将内膜瓣钉合并使ICA管腔缩窄风险最小。	This maneuver ensures adequate tack-down of the intimal flaps and minimizes the risk of ICA constriction.
另外一根单针缝线从动脉切开的近端开始缝合，缝合原则同上。	A second single-armed suture begins the closure at the proximal arteriotomy site using the same principles.
动脉切开两边的分次穿针缝合技术有利于双侧缝合边距对等，特别是当动脉切开线不小心偏离中轴时更是如此。	This double-suture technique from both sides of the arteriotomy allows correction of wall-length discrepancies from either side, a feature especially helpful in cases where the arteriotomy is inadvertently not straight.
而沿动脉中轴线切开的缝合就更有效率，而且缝合的管腔足够，相对大一点的针脚既能封闭血管又不导致管腔的狭窄。	Suturing can continue more efficiently in the middle section of the arteriotomy where the lumen is generous and larger bites of the wall can be incorporated into the closure without luminal constriction.
笔者特别注意将动脉的所有层次缝合在一起，并且针脚间距足够的小，这样漏血的的机会最小。	I pay special attention to include all arterial layers during suturing and to place the stitch in small enough intervals so that the chance of leakage is minimized.
另外，不要将外膜瓣缝合到管腔内。	In addition, none of the adventitial tags are sewn into the lumen.
整个操作过程中应持续用肝素盐水间断冲洗管腔。	Periodic irrigation of the lumen with heparin solution continues during the entire process.
图19.上下缝合会师时，在最后打结之前，松开颈内动脉上的血管圈套带或去除血管夹，允许返流血冲洗两次，移除管腔内的残渣或者空气，避免其进入远端脑循环。	Figure 19: When the two stitches meet, prior to the final knot, the vascular loop or clip on the ICA is removed, allowing the artery to back-bleed twice, removing any debris or air that should not enter the distal cerebral circulation.
在颈总动脉和颈外动脉同样操作冲洗残渣和空气。	The same maneuver is performed for CCA and ECA.
再次阻断血管并将结扎缝线。（插入图）	The clamps are then reapplied and finally, the stitch is tied down (inset).
笔者会在最后二针缝线拉紧时用充满肝素盐水的钝头注射器注满管腔；然后才拉上线结。	A heparinized saline syringe with a blunt tip is used to fill the lumen while the two stitches are held tight; I then lay down the knot.
紧接着撤回注射器，防止空气进入血管内。	Next, the syringe is withdrawn, preventing air from entering the vessel.
血管再通	Restoration of Circulation
阻断夹移除的顺序正好与动脉切开前放置血管夹的顺序相反。	The order of clamp removal is exactly opposite to the order of clamp placement just before the arteriotomy.
首先，放松颈外动脉上的血管圈套带或者取出阻断夹，将所有残渣冲向侧枝循环丰富的面部。	First, the vessel loops/clamp on the ECA are loosened/removed, allowing any loose debris to be diverted toward the significantly collateralized arterial circulation of the face.
然后释放颈总动脉上的血管夹，恢复前向血流，再一次将残渣冲向颈外动脉循环。	The vascular clamp on the CCA is released next, restoring anterograde flow, again, into the ECA circulation.
这时，动脉缝合处通常会渗血。	At this point, there is often oozing from the arteriotomy suture line.
除非是搏动性出血，通过填塞止血纱或者凝血酶浸泡的明胶海绵后，渗血几乎都会停止；同时随着颈内动脉的再通，管腔内压力的下降也有利于渗血的中止。	Unless it is pulsatile in nature, it will almost always cease with time after tamponade treatment by a layer of SURGICEL or thrombin-soaked Gelfoam strips and intraluminal pressure reduction after restoration of the flow within the ICA.
最后，在需要补针的吻合处补针后移除颈内动脉上的阻断夹。	Finally, the ICA circulation is restored with removal of the clamp or aneurysm clip prior to placement of additional sutures along the anastomosis line.
与渗血不一样的搏动性出血，需要进一步缝合补针，否则出血不会停止。	Pulsatile bleeding, rather than oozing, is unlikely to stop and will require additional sutures.
用一片棉片轻轻的压迫血管切开处经常能使持续的渗血停止。	Gentle tamponade using a piece of gauze on the arteriotomy site typically stops the remaining ooze.
脑电图应该在脑血管循环恢复后20分钟内持续监测。	EEG monitoring is continued for an additional 20 minutes after restoration of circulation.
图20.图示阻断夹去除及血流恢复的顺序。	Figure 20: The order of clamp removal and flow restoration is illustrated.
严格遵守血流恢复的顺序以避免远端栓塞。	This order of flow restoration is imperative to avoidance of distal embolization.
补片血管成形术	Patch Angioplasty
应该避免在血管切开处常规使用补片。	The routine practice of patching the arteriotomy site is avoided.
当颈内动脉管径小，并且动脉切开的边缘不整齐时笔者选择性使用Hemashield补片。	I selectively use a Hemashield patch when the ICA is of small caliber and the edges of the arteriotomy are uneven.
缝合补片的原则和上面提及的血管缝合原则相似。	The principles of suturing the patch are similar to those described above.
附件中的录像将进一步说明补片技术。	The accompanying videos further illustrate the technique of patching.
把补片放置在动脉切开上方来修剪补片至合适的长度。	The length of the patch material is tailored by placing the patch over the arteriotomy and cutting it to the appropriate length.
补片两端再修剪成细窄状。	The ends of the patch are then tapered.
笔者采用双针6-0普瑞林将补片的ICA端和动脉切开的远端缝合在一起，同时用橡皮脚垫的钳夹固定缝线在位。	I use a double-armed 6-0 prolene suture to attach the ICA end of the patch to the distal end of the arteriotomy while rubber-shod clamps are used to hold the sutures in place.
用连续不打结缝合方式缝合从ICA到CCA的内侧壁，然后继续缝合至外侧壁的中间。	A running, nonlocking stitching method closes the medial wall from the ICA toward the CCA and continues to the midsection of the lateral wall.
接下来，用双针缝线的另一针缝合剩下的未吻合的外侧壁。	Next, the remaining lateral wall is sutured using the other arm of the double-armed suture.
就笔者个人经验，CEA需要2.5-3小时时间，其中阻断夹闭时间在30-40分钟之间。	With experience, CEA can be conducted in 2.5-3 hours with 30-40 minutes of cross-clamp time.
阻断时间的明显增加与脑缺血风险增加相关。	Significant increase in this cross-clamp time is associated with an increased risk of cerebral ischemia.
下面的术中照片用来举例说明右侧经内动脉内膜剥脱术的手术步骤:	The following intraoperative photos illustrate the operative steps for a right-sided endarterectomy:
图22a.显示皮肤切口（上图）和剪刀扩张分离显露颈动脉鞘（中图）。	Figure 22a: The skin incision (top) and the spreading action of the scissors for exposure of the carotid sheath (middle) are demonstrated.
面总静脉被分离后用两根缝线结扎静脉。	The common facial vein is isolated and two sutures will ligate the vein.
图22b. 斑块的外侧面已经从颈动脉腔内分离。	Figure 22b: The lateral side of the plaque is separated from the lumen of the carotid artery.
注意主刀和助手的协同移动。	Note the synergistic movements of the assistant and the operator.
图22c. 同样，斑块的内壁沿其在颈内动脉和颈总动脉的末端分离后移动。	Figure 22c: Similarly, the medial wall of the plaque is mobilized in expectation of its disconnection along its ends within the ICA and CCA.
斑块向颈外动脉内的延伸也被分离。	The extension of the plaque into the ECA is also separated.
图22d. 移除斑块后小心检查颈内动脉管腔。	Figure 22d: The plaque has been removed and the ICA lumen is carefully inspected.
小片内膜瓣最好在缝合血管时钉合在血管壁上。	The plaque feathers down but a small shelf of intima may have to be tacked down during the closure of the arteriotomy.
图22e. 小心检查管腔，清除所有明显的内膜瓣。	Figure 22e: The lumen is carefully inspected and all the obvious free intimal flaps are removed.
图22f.颈内动脉管腔狭小提示需要使用补片成形术。	Figure 22f: The small caliber of the ICA indicates the need for patch angioplasty.
在缝针穿过补片和血管壁后折返防止缝合后漏血。	The needle is turned during its passage within the graft and the vessel walls to prevent leakage later.
图22g.血管壁的大边距缝合将血管壁拉入缝线内能预防不规则的外缘碎片凸向管腔。	Figure 22g: Larger bites of the wall can be incorporated in the suture line to prevent the tags along the irregular edges from facing the lumen.
图22h.在颈总动脉内血管切开的近端，斑块横断后的瓣膜缝合到外壁上。	Figure 22h: The flaps along the proximal end of the arteriotomy in the CCA where the plaque was disconnected are tacked down using the suture.
图22i.同样，颈内动脉内动脉切开的远端内膜瓣也应被缝合。	Figure 22i: Similarly, the flaps along the distal end of the arteriotomy in the ICA are tacked down.
图22j.在内侧吻合线中点二根缝线会师。	Figure 22j: The suture lines meet in the middle of the medial anastomotic line.
图22k.展示补片成形后的最后效果。	Figure 22k: The final result of patch angioplasty is demonstrated.
术野缝合	Closure
充分止血是最重要的事。	Adequate hemostasis is paramount.
颈阔肌下方的空隙留置一根小的引流管。	A small drain is left within the subplatysmal space.
引流管并不能预防动脉性出血导致的症状性改变，但是其潜在目的在于控制缓慢的静脉渗血和作为一个术后阶段开始出血的信号（比如突然过度引流）。	The drain will not prevent arterial bleeding from becoming symptomatic, but can potentially control slow venous ooze and serve as a warning sign (upon its sudden overflow) in case bleeding starts during the postoperative period.
引流管不应该给术者自信的假象，而忽视精确止血的重要性。	The drain should not provide the surgeon with a false sense of confidence, minimizing the importance of immaculate hemostasis.
引流管缝合固定并在术后第一天予以拔除。	The drain is sutured in place and is removed during the first postoperative day.
皮下仅有一层组织即颈阔肌需要缝合。	The only layer closed underneath the skin and subcutaneous tissue is the platysma.
采用3-0薇乔缝线缝合，	This is completed with 3-0 vicryl sutures.
这一层只需要解剖上复位固定，而无需不透水缝合。	The layers are approximated anatomically and not closed in a water-tight fashion.
皮下组织也采用3-0薇乔缝线缝合，	The deep dermis/subcutaneous tissues are also closed using 3-0 vicryl sutures.
皮肤采用4-0可吸收单乔缝线皮内缝合。	The skin is approximated using a 4-0 monocryl subcuticular suture.
平稳唤醒的重要性和采取措施避免明显的valsalva状态（如咳嗽）再怎么说都不为过；必须向麻醉团队告知这一要求。	The importance of a smooth wake-up with measures taken to avoid significant valsalva-like states (such as coughing) cannot be overestimated; this consideration must be requested from the anesthesia team.
术后监护包括二个重要的概念。	Postoperative care consists of two important concepts.
首先，移除斑块后通常会重建之前缺失的循环。	First, removal of the plaque often restores circulation that was previously absent.
术前高度狭窄与术后因高灌注损伤导致的脑出血风险增加相关。	Higher degrees of preoperative stenosis correlate with increasing risks of postoperative intracranial hemorrhage due to hyperperfusion injury.
因此术后血压管理是最重要的。	Postoperative blood pressure management is, therefore, paramount.
收缩压不应该高于140mmHg。	Systolic blood pressure should not rise above 140 mmHg.
这就要求持续或者间断静脉给予降压药物比如肼苯哒嗪或拉贝洛尔和/或开始口服降压药。	This may require intermittent or continuous infusion of intravenous antihypertensive medications such as hydralazine or labetalol and/or initiation of oral medications.
第二，伤口监测对于诊断血液积聚导致的颈部早期肿胀很重要。	Secondly, wound monitoring is important to detect the early stages of neck swelling because of hematoma accumulation.
通过视诊和触诊气管就可以达到目的。	This is accomplished through visual inspection and palpation of the trachea.
引流液体也可以提供线索。	The drain output may also provide a clue.
术后颈部血肿最常见于静脉来源，但是有时也会是动脉缝合不严密导致。	A postoperative neck hematoma is most commonly from a venous source, but occasionally can be from an inadequate arteriotomy closure.
血肿压迫气管会导致呼吸梗阻。	The mass effect from the hematoma can obstruct the patient’s airway.
医生必须准备好必要时在床边打开伤口来减压气道。	The surgeon must be prepared to reopen the wound at the bedside to allow for decompression of the trachea, if necessary.
这是必须处理的外科急症。	This is an emergency and must be handled as such.
再次手术探查通常会发现深部组织非特异性的静脉渗血和不小心穿透颈内静脉后出血。	Re-exploratory surgery often discloses nonspecific venous oozing from the deep tissues and bleeding from inadvertent puncture sites in the jugular vein.
低流量搭桥	Low Flow Revascularization
Woringer和Kunlin在1962年实施了颈总动脉-颅内动脉搭桥，这是人类历史上有记录的第一例颅外-颅内（EC-IC）搭桥。	Woringer and Kunlin performed the first documented extracranial-intracranial (EC-IC) bypass in humans in 1962. This procedure was performed between the common carotid and the intracranial arteries.
尽管患者术后因肺炎而死亡，但此次尝试为脑血管重建新纪元的到来奠定了基础。	Unfortunately, the patient died from pneumonia during the postoperative period. However, this experience paved the way for the new era of cerebral revascularization.
1967年，Yasargil完成了第一例成功的颞浅动脉-大脑中动脉（STA-MCA）搭桥，	Yasargil performed the first successful superficial temporal artery to middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) bypass in humans in 1967.
之后，这项技术不断得到改进，适应征也在扩展。	Since then, this procedure has evolved in its technique and indications.
目前STA-MCA搭桥手术的主要适应征为：	The current main indications for the STA-MCA bypass include:
缺血性脑病	Cerebral ischemia
Moyamoya病	Moyamoya disease
复杂颅内动脉瘤	Complex intracranial aneurysms
复杂颅底肿瘤	Complex skull base tumors
鉴于STA-MCA搭桥的适应征仍广受争议，本文将简略回顾该手术的历史以及最近相关的几项研究。	Because there is much controversy about the true indications of this form of bypass, I will briefly review the history and implications of recent trials on the application of this operation.
缺血性脑病	Cerebral Ischemia
对于闭塞性脑血管病，比如不适合行颈动脉内膜剥脱术的颈内动脉（ICA）狭窄或闭塞，STA-MCA搭桥是非常重要的治疗手段。	The STA-MCA bypass has played an important role in the management of cerebrovascular occlusive diseases such as internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis or occlusion that are not amenable to carotid endarterectomy.
有症状的ICA和MCA狭窄或闭塞是最早被明确的手术适应征。	Symptomatic ICA and MCA stenosis or occlusion became the earliest established indications for this treatment.
1977年Barnett及其同事开展了一项大型的随机化试验，研究STA-MCA搭桥治疗闭塞性脑血管疾病的价值（EC-IC搭桥试验），并于1985年发布了结果：搭桥手术不能使患者受益！	In 1977, Barnett and colleagues took on a large randomized controlled trial to study the value of the STA-MCA bypass (EC-IC bypass Trial) for managing cerebrovascular occlusive disease. Their results were published in 1985, indicating a failure of the bypass to provide benefit.
尽管如此，该研究却发现桥血管的通畅率超过95%，提示在技术方面上手术是成功的。	Despite these results, the trial demonstrated a greater than 95% graft patency rate, indicating the technical success of the operation.
虽然试验采用了合适的方法学，但之后却出现许多质疑：研究结果是否可被应用？	Notwithstanding the proper methodology of this study, many arguments ensued about the applicability of the results.
一些最令人信服的理由包括：研究者未能明确脑缺血的原因（栓塞还是闭塞）、没有客观地量化狭窄程度或脑灌注和血流动力学、研究主要纳入低风险患者使得大量搭桥病例被排除在外。	Some of the most convincing arguments questioning this study were the investigator’s failure to identify the cause of ischemic events (embolic or occlusive), the lack of objective quantification of stenosis or cerebral perfusion and hemodynamics, the inclusion of predominately low-risk patients, and conduction of a large number of procedures outside the trial.
外科医师也意识到，必须更谨慎地确立术前选择标准。	It became obvious that more rigorous preoperative selection criteria were necessary.
即便这项研究存在许多问题，受其影响，STA-MCA搭桥治疗闭塞性脑缺血疾病的数量大大减少。	After the trial, in spite of the questions about it, there was a substantial decrease in the rate of the STA-MCA bypass procedures performed for cerebrovascular occlusive disease.
上述EC-IC搭桥试验的支持者随后又强调选择病例时血流动力学因素的重要性。	The proponents of the above EC-IC Bypass Trial later emphasized the importance of hemodynamic factors in patient selection.
血流动力学衰退II级或“灌注荒凉”的患者可以从STA-MCA搭桥手术获益。	Patients with hemodynamic failure Grade II, or “misery perfusion” may benefit from the STA-MCA bypass.
血流动力学衰退II级指患者已丧失所有代偿机制来克服血管闭塞引起的脑组织低灌注压。	Hemodynamic failure Grade II describes patients who have exhausted all compensatory mechanisms available to overcome the decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure from vascular occlusion.
这种情况的特点有：局部平均通过时间（rMTT）延长、局部脑血流下降（rCBF）、以及PET-CT提示局部氧摄取分数（rOEF）增加。	This situation is characterized by increased regional mean transit time (rMTT), decreased regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), and increased regional oxygen extraction fraction (rOEF) on positron emission tomography (PET).
St.Louis颈动脉闭塞研究发现此类患者接受搭桥后rOEF得到明显改善并返回了基线值。	Such patients showed dramatic improvement in their rOEF and return to baseline values in the St. Louis Carotid Occlusion Study.
基于之前的标准与新进展的影像学模态，一个日本研究组在2006年启动了新项目-日本人EC-IC搭桥试验（JET试验），结果表明搭桥术后的患者在第2年时结局显著改观。	In 2006, a Japanese study group conducted a new trial, the Japanese EC-IC Bypass Trial (JET Trial), based on the above criteria as well as advanced imaging modalities. The JET Trial demonstrated a significantly improved 2-year outcome for surgical patients.
2008年结束的北美试验-颈动脉闭塞手术研究（COSS）提示接受STA-MCA搭桥的患者术后30天内并发症发生率高，第2年时有所下降但不具有统计学意义。	Despite these results, a North American trial, the Carotid Occlusion Surgery Study (COSS), completed in 2008, proved negative results for STA-MCA bypass surgery with a high 30-day morbidity among surgical patients and a nonstatistically significant decrease in 2-year morbidity.
这些相抵触的结果不禁令人怀疑，是否是术者的技术水平和完成单支STA-MCA搭桥所需的时间造成了差异。	These opposing results raised suspicions that the technical abilities of the surgeons involved and the length of time required for blossoming of the single-branch STA-MCA bypass could be factors in the discrepancy of the results.
鉴于这些研究结论的不一致，又有若干研究组通过系列病例分析或者小型试验提出双重搭桥的建议，即同时桥接STA的两个分支，不仅出现再灌注损伤的风险不高，还可以使患者获益于高流量搭桥提供的血流扩充。	In light of these inconsistencies, a number of study groups, through case series or small trials, have proposed that double-barrel bypass, using both branches of the STA, may allow the benefit of the augmented flow of high-flow bypass without the high risk of reperfusion injuries.
介入技术的发展也弱化了搭桥手术在脑缺血疾病治疗中的角色。	In addition, advancement of endovascular techniques has led to another decline in the application and popularity of bypass surgery for ischemic disease.
尽管如此，对于这些不适合血管内治疗或治疗失败的急性卒中伴有限分水岭区梗死的罕见病例需要急诊行血管重建时，STA-MCA搭桥依然很重要。	Nonetheless, STA-MCA has played a role in emergent revascularization for rare acute stroke patients with limited watershed infarcts who are not candidates for or who have failed endovascular therapy.
已接受更进一步药物/抗血小板治疗的颈动脉闭塞患者若缺血症状还在不断进展而且影像学证实灌注非常差，可进行STA-MCA搭桥。	I continue to offer this form of revascularization to patients with carotid occlusion who suffer from progressive ischemic symptoms despite aggressive medical/antiplatelet therapy with documented evidence of misery perfusion on hemodynamic imaging.
Moyamoya病	Moyamoya Disease
这是第二个适应征。	The second indication for the STA-MCA bypass is Moyamoya disease.
STA-MCA搭桥是否有益于Moyamoya病患者，目前还没有随机化的临床试验结果支持，但是已存在的III级证据已足够信服大多数临床医师。	Although its benefit in this disease has not been examined in randomized clinical trials, level III evidence has been sufficient to convince most clinicians of its benefit.
这是因为自然病程中的Moyamoya病患者并发症率和死亡率相当高，但是接受脑血管重建手术后可以即刻得到改善。	The reason behind this philosophy is the marked morbidity and mortality rate seen along the natural course of this disease and the almost immediate benefit following revascularization surgery.
约75%的儿童和20%的成人未干预患者，发病后2年内具有非常高的致残率和死亡率。	The natural history of this disease is associated with a significant debilitating morbidity or mortality within 2 years of the initial presentation in approximately 75% of children. Similar results occur in 20% of adults within a similar time frame.
基于影像学发现，Moyamoya病有许多分期方法（以Suzuki分期最为常用），但它们对选择适应征以及判断预后的作用还有待被验证。	Despite the establishment of a number of classification systems for staging the imaging findings of Moyamoya disease (the most widely used being the Suzuki classification), there is no proven correlation between the classification and surgical indications or prognosis.
对于有症状的Moyamoya病患者，争议不在于是否需要血管重建，而在于应该实施何种术式：直接的还是间接的（如脑-硬膜-动脉-血管连通术，EDAS）？	The controversy with regard to symptomatic Moyamoya disease may not necessarily concern the concept of performing a revascularization procedure, but rather which procedure should be performed: direct or indirect (such as encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis, EDAS).
无症状患者的治疗方案已经达成一致，就是改变生活方式和药物治疗。	Consensus for the most appropriate treatment for asymptomatic patients is lifestyle changes and medical management.
希望还在进行中的研究-无症状性Moyamoya登记试验（AMORE试验）能够更详尽地揭示这类人群的远期预后，结果将有可能改变其治疗方案。	An ongoing trial, the Asymptomatic Moyamoya Registry (AMORE Trial) will provide more detailed knowledge regarding the long-term prognosis of asymptomatic patients with Moyamoya disease. The results could possibly lead to a change in the management choices for these patients.
必须注意不同人种之间Moyamoya病患者的人口统计学资料存在诸多区别。	It is important to note that there are a number of differences in the demographics of patients with Moyamoya disease among different ethnicities.
亚洲人种中，Moyamoya病主要为原发性，儿童和成人各有一个发病高峰期，成人患者最常见的表现为出血；	In patients of Asian ethnicity, Moyamoya disease is mainly a primary disease with bimodal distribution in both children and adults, and hemorrhage is the more common presentation in adults.
而白人发病原因多为继发性，比如继发于动脉粥样硬化和放射暴露，成人患者倾向为原发性，而且以缺血为主要表现。	However, in Caucasians, Moyamoya disease more commonly occurs secondary to other diseases and processes, such as atherosclerosis and radiation exposure, and it tends to occur primarily in adults, presenting mainly with ischemia.
许多临床医师认为儿童患者的最佳治疗方案是非直接的脑血管重建，因为儿童的血管很细、吻合难度大，另外，儿童的再生能力强，能够形成有效的新生血管。	Many clinicians believe that the most appropriate treatment for children is indirect revascularization because of their fairly small-caliber vessels that make vascular anastomosis technically difficult, and also because of the high proliferative capacity in children, permitting efficient neovascularization.
有一些研究表明直接的脑血管重建比间接的效果更好，加上成人的血管足够粗可以吻合，所以，对于成人患者，STA-MCA搭桥是很合适的选择。	However, in adults, the STA-MCA bypass is the more suitable choice because adults have large enough vessels for anastomosis, and some studies have shown better results with direct rather than indirect revascularization.
2014年发表的日本成人Moyamoya试验结果也支持这种观点。	The Japanese Adult Moyamoya Trial published in 2014 supported this hypothesis.
进一步讲，原发性Moyamoya病在成人患者中主要导致出血，促进脑血管再生的间接重建法潜在可能增加出血风险。	Furthermore, because the more common presentation in adults with primary disease is hemorrhage, an indirect technique would potentially be problematic as it increases neovascularization, adding to the risk of hemorrhage.
也有一些报道提倡对成人患者联合采用直接和间接的重建方式。	There also have been some reports advocating the use of combined direct and indirect modalities for the treatment of such patients.
基本上所有出现TIA和卒中的Moyamoya患者都需要血管重建。	Revascularization is indicated in almost all patients with Moyamoya disease who present with TIA or stroke.
若几乎整个MCA供血区已被卒中累及，此时并不能行搭桥手术，因为能够挽救的脑组织已剩余不多。	Patients who have suffered from major strokes involving almost the entire MCA territory are not candidates as there is little remaining brain to protect with a bypass.
发生Moyamoya相关颅内出血时，只要灌注成像表明脑组织存在低灌注或脑血流储备减少，就推荐行血管重建，尽管搭桥手术对未来颅内出血的预防效果仍有争议。	I recommend revascularization for Moyamoya-associated intracranial hemorrhage as long as there is evidence of hypoperfusion and reduced cerebrovascular reserve on perfusion imaging.  The protective effect of bypass on the future risk of intracranial hemorrhage is debated.
首先重建有症状的一侧，最快于1周后再行对侧手术。	The symptomatic side is revascularized first.  The second surgery may be conducted as soon as a week later.
复杂的颅内动脉瘤	Complex Intracranial Aneurysms
处理颅内动脉瘤有两大类情况需要进行血管搭桥：1）阻断血流的时间很长时行暂时性搭桥；2）动脉瘤的夹闭无法规避载瘤动脉或其主要分支损伤时行永久性搭桥。	There are two broad circumstances that demand the use of bypass for repair of cerebral aneurysms: 1) a temporary bypass for the procedures requiring prolonged interruption of blood flow, and 2) a permanent bypass for clip ligation of the aneurysms that require compromising the parent vessel or a major branch.
复杂动脉瘤手术需永久性搭桥的常见适应征包括：	The common indications for permanent bypass in complex aneurysm surgery are:
1.宽颈、大型或巨大型动脉瘤	1.Broad-neck, large or giant aneurysms
2.无瘤颈（梭形动脉瘤）	2.Absent neck (fusiform aneurysms)
3.瘤颈存在动脉粥样硬化或钙化	3.Atherosclerosis or calcification at the neck
4.大型或巨大型动脉瘤伴有血栓形成	4.Thrombotic large or giant aneurysms
5.血泡样（床突旁颈内动脉背侧的动脉瘤）	5.Blister-like (dorsal paraclinoid aneurysms)
6.复杂的夹层动脉瘤	6.Complex dissecting aneurysms
7.海绵窦内巨大型动脉瘤	7.Intracavernous giant aneurysms
8.创伤性/感染性假性动脉瘤	8.Traumatic/infectious pseudoaneurysms
然而，搭桥手术并非治疗这些或其他动脉瘤的唯一手段，	However, in these and other situations, bypass is not the only option available for revascularization.
临床医师还可以选择使用多个跨血管夹塑形夹闭动脉瘤、血管内支架辅助的弹簧圈栓塞、侧支循环良好并能耐受球囊阻塞试验（BOT）者可以介入途径闭塞近端血管。	Other possibilities include the use of multiple fenestrated clips for lumen reconstruction, endovascular stent-assisted coiling of the aneurysm, or proximal endovascular occlusion in patients with good collateral flow who undergo a successful balloon occlusion test (BOT).
但要注意的是，BOT的结果不是非常可靠。	Note, however, that the results of the BOT can be quite unreliable.
血流转向装置等新型血管内治疗方式明显减少了搭桥手术在动脉瘤领域的应用。	Advanced endovascular methods including flow diversion technology have significantly narrowed the applications of revascularization for aneurysms.
复杂的颅底肿瘤	Complex Skull Base Tumors
某些颅底肿瘤会侵犯前循环的大血管，术中可能要切除这些非可有可无的受累动脉，此时就需要血管搭桥来保持其供血区的血流。	Aggressive skull base tumors may invade the major vessels of the anterior circulation, and thus require sacrifice of certain indispensible vessels, demanding a bypass to maintain blood supply to the associated vascular territory.
一些良性肿瘤（包括脑膜瘤）可以被完全切除而不损伤血管，其他更具侵袭性的肿瘤可能无法成功地从受累血管剥离。	Although some benign tumors, including meningiomas, can be gross totally removed, leaving the vessel intact, other more aggressive tumors cannot be dissected from the vessel with as much success.
对于后者，有些外科医师会选择次全切除病变，残余肿瘤行放疗；有些则提倡牺牲血管更坚决地移除肿瘤。	Although some surgeons may choose to proceed with subtotal resection of the tumor combined with treating the remaining portion with radiotherapy, others advocate sacrificing the vessel during aggressive tumor removal.
能耐受BOT的患者，单纯结扎动脉近端而不搭桥也是可行的。	Proximal arterial occlusion without bypass is a possible alternative, provided a BOT is performed.
鉴于此类人群术后依然可能发生卒中，这种做法具有很大的争议性。	This practice remains quite controversial, however, given that many patients have succumbed to stroke postoperatively despite a successful preoperative BOT.
不管BOT结果是否令人满意，个人还是推荐行血管重建。	I recommend revascularization despite an encouraging BOT.
肿瘤往往同时累及颅神经等其他重要结构，全切并不现实，所以大部分病例应推崇次全切除病变随后放疗。	I advocate for subtotal resection followed by radiotherapy in most circumstances, because complete tumor resection is most often not possible due to the concurrent involvement of other vital structures such as the cranial nerves.
术前需要许多影像学模态的帮助来确定血管重建的必要性以及制定合理的手术计划。	A number of imaging modalities are required to properly determine the need for a revascularization procedure, as well as for proper surgical planning.
主要有三种影像模态：1）结构影像观察脑实质、占位效应和/或有无结构异常；2）血管造影了解颅内外血管情况；3）灌注或代谢成像评价术中需切断/闭塞的血管或目标病变相关的灌注分布。	The imaging sources are comprised of three main types: 1) structural imaging for assessment of the brain parenchyma, any mass effect and/or structural abnormalities; 2) angiography for visualization of the extracranial and intracranial components of the anterior circulation; and 3) perfusion or metabolic imaging, for evaluation of perfusion disturbances related to the underlying pathology or proximal vessel occlusion or sacrifice during surgery.
上述各种影像模态的子类在其他地方已有介绍，本篇只讨论实际工作中常用并与本章主题有关的。	Various imaging modalities have been described for each of the above types. This chapter includes a discussion only of those commonly used in practice and relevant to the objectives of this chapter.
结构影像	Structural Imaging
目前使用的最敏感的结构影像模态为MRI，选择合适的影像序列帮助非常大。	The most sensitive structural imaging modality currently used in clinical practice is magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Proper use of the different imaging sequences is beneficial.
弥散加权成像（DWI）判断脑缺血部位与动脉供血区的关系时具有特殊价值。	Diffusion weighted images (DWI) have a special value in cerebral ischemia for correlating the anatomic distribution of ischemic events with vascular territories.
某一动脉分布区内存在多个缺血灶病因可能是闭塞或狭窄；缺血灶随机分布于不同的血管区最有可能是因为栓塞。	The presence of multiple ischemic foci in a single vascular territory raises suspicion of an occlusive or stenotic etiology, whereas random distribution of ischemic foci along different vascular territories holds a higher suspicion for embolic events.
ACA和MCA、MCA和PCA的分水岭梗死是低灌注的典型表现。	Infarcts at the border zones between the anterior cerebral and middle cerebral arteries as well as middle cerebral and posterior cerebral arteries are characteristic of hypoperfusion phenomenon.
CT排除颅内出血有明显的优势，可以区别急症患者是短暂性脑缺血发作和卒中，还是肿瘤卒中。	In emergency situations, computed tomography (CT) imaging is very valuable for ruling out intracranial hemorrhage, as in patients with transient ischemic attacks and stroke or neoplastic apoplexy.
血管造影	Angiographic Imaging
协助诊断、构建术前计划和术后判断桥血管通畅性时必须行血管造影。	Angiography is required for diagnostic purposes, preoperative planning, and postoperative evaluation of graft patency.
尤其是血管造影可以评估：1）脑血管循环和受血动脉的通畅性；2）颈外动脉系统供血血管的可及性；3）侧支循环的情况，发育良好时可避免搭桥手术；4）预计行吻合的血管管径，即STA的额、顶支和MCA的皮层支。	More specifically, angiography evaluates 1) the patency of the intracranial circulation and recipient vessels; 2) the patency of the external carotid circulation donor vessels; 3) the development of collateral circulation, which if sufficient may eliminate the need for revascularization; and 4) the diameter of the vessels that would be the expected sites of anastomosis, namely the frontal and parietal branches of the STA and the cortical branches of the MCA.
导管造影是血管成像的金标准，但是是有创检查。	Although catheter-based angiography is the gold standard modality for vascular imaging, it is still somewhat invasive.
CTA和MRA等无创模态的空间分辨率有限、近颅骨处有伪影产生，	Noninvasive modalities such as CT and magnetic resonance (MR) angiography have limited spatial resolution and are complicated by the bony artifact near the skull base.
而且他们不能准确提供靶血管的血流信息。	They also do not provide reliable information about the flow within the target vessels.
灌注成像和代谢成像	Perfusion and Metabolic Imaging
灌注成像模态包括PET、氙-CT、CTP、MRP和单光子发射CT等，可以评价脑血管闭塞性疾病中，侧支循环是否能代偿阻塞或狭窄血管的血流。	In cerebrovascular occlusive disease, perfusion imaging determines the success of collateral vasculature in overcoming the ischemic insults of the underlying vascular occlusion or stenosis. These imaging modalities include PET, xenon computed tomography, CT perfusion, MR perfusion and single photon emission CT.
前述关于STA-MCA搭桥的研究因为仅仅以血管造影结果来抉择是否行脑血管重建而饱受诟病，目前，标准已改为依据灌注成像提示的脑灌注压下降后脑缺血的血流储备情况。	As previously mentioned in the above discussion of the STA-MCA bypass trials, the sole use of angiographic findings in patient selection for revascularization surgery has been criticized. It is currently standard practice to use perfusion imaging to determine the status of reserve mechanisms for overcoming cerebral ischemia as a result of the decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure.
有四项特别有价值的参数用来间接评估血流储备情况：1）局部脑血流（rCBF）；2）局部平均通过时间（rMTT）；3）局部脑血液容积（rCBV）；4）局部氧摄取分数（rOEF）。	In order to indirectly assess such reserve mechanisms, four parameters are especially valuable: 1) regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), 2) regional mean transit time (rMTT), 3) regional cerebral blood volume (rCBV), and 4) regional oxygen extraction fraction (rOEF).
脑灌注压下降后一系列代偿机制随之启动，根据血流动力学受损程度可分为两期。	A scheme of events has been involved in compensatory mechanisms associated with a decrease in cerebral perfusion pressure. This scheme divides the process into two stages of hemodynamic impairment.
第一期即“自笔者调节期”，此时通过动脉扩张依然可以保持正常的rCBF，但是rMTT和rCBV增加。	Stage I, also known as the autoregulatory stage, maintains normal rCBF values by arteriolar vasodilatation, resulting in an increase in regional mean transit time (rMTT) and regional cerebral blood volume (rCBV).
发展到第二期或者称为“血流动力衰竭期”时，自笔者调节能力已经几乎耗尽，只能通过提高rOEF维持脑组织的氧供，	The second stage, or the hemodynamic failure stage, occurs at the point when autoregulatory processes have been mostly exhausted and sustaining oxygen requirements of the parenchyma are achieved by means of an increase in rOEF.
而rOEF上升是导致卒中的独立危险因素。	An increase in rOEF is a significant independent risk factor for stroke.
尽管可能此时rCBF处于正常范围，但卒中风险仍然在增加。	Although rOEF may also increase in a state of normal rCBV, the risk of stroke is still considered increased.
进行基础灌注成像检查的同时应该联合挑战试验。	Not only is standard perfusion imaging valuable in the preoperative evaluation, but challenge tests may also be employed.
首先是乙酰唑胺试验。	The first challenge test is the acetazolamide challenge test.
乙酰唑胺属于血管扩张剂，应用之后，血管自笔者舒张能力已耗竭的患者将出现盗血现象和缺血，而未达最大代偿水平的患者其rCBF可得到改善。	A vasodilatation stimulus, acetazolamide, would cause a steal phenomenon and ischemia among patients with exhausted autoregulatory vasodilatation; this is in contrast to improved rCBF in patients who have not reached maximal compensatory regional vasodilatation.
乙酰唑胺试验有三种结果：	The results of the acetazolamide challenge test have been classified into three types:
增加原本处于正常基线范围的脑血流（CBF）；	Type I patients have normal baseline cerebral blood flow (CBF) that increases after the acetazolamide challenge.
改善原本低CBF脑区的灌注；	Type II patients have areas of decreased CBF on baseline studies that improve after acetazolamide administration.
原本rCBF就低的仍反常性进行性下降。	Type III patients have decreased CBF at baseline and a paradoxic continued reduction in regional CBF after acetazolamide administration.
最后一种患者可以从脑血管重建手术获益最多。	Type III patients are thought to benefit the most from microsurgical revascularization.
第二种挑战试验是球囊阻塞试验（BOT）。	The second challenge test is the balloon occlusion test (BOT).
若孤立动脉瘤或切除肿瘤需要结扎受累血管，术前BOT能够判断侧支循环提供的血流量是否足够，	This test determines whether established collateral circulation can maintain adequate blood flow in case of proximal vessel sacrifice, as in aneurysm entrapment or tumor resection.
但要牢记有许多BOT阴性的患者术后依然会出现脑缺血。	However, despite a successful BOT, a significant proportion of patients develop ischemia postoperatively.
所以无论BOT结果如何，只要术中有牺牲相应血管，最好还是行血管重建。	Thus, revascularization as a standard practice after proximal vessel sacrifice, regardless of BOT results, is preferred.
熟悉颞浅动脉（STA）的解剖对分离其主干及分支完成搭桥手术至关重要。	Understanding the microsurgical anatomy of the STA is a key factor in safe dissection of its branches for bypass procedures.
图1：STA是颈外动脉（ECA）两根终末分支里小的那支。	Figure 1: The STA is the smaller of the two terminal branches of the external carotid artery.
STA起自埋藏于腮腺内的ECA，在下颌颈后方上行，通过颧弓根的外侧，随后分为额、顶两终支。	It originates within the parotid gland and extends superiorly behind the neck of the mandible to pass superficial to the posterior root of the zygomatic process. Above this process, it divides into its two final branches, the frontal and the parietal.
近颧突处，有面神经颞支和许多伴随静脉越过STA。（图片由Al Rhoton, Jr馈赠）	Near the zygomatic process, the temporal branches of the facial nerve and a number of concomitant veins cross over the STA (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
耳颞神经伴行于颞浅动脉（STA）全程的后方。	The STA is also related to the auriculotemporal nerve, which runs behind the STA along its course.
STA主干的内径约1.8 ± 0.5mm，其终支为1.4 ± 0.5 mm，	The main trunk of the STA has an inner diameter of about 1.8 ± 0.5 mm, whereas its terminal branches have an inner diameter of about 1.4 ± 0.5 mm.
直接搭桥所需的供血动脉至少为0.9mm。	The minimum diameter of the donor vessel for direct bypass is 0.9mm.
顶支位于颞肌筋膜表浅，常常比额支粗，往头顶及往后走形与耳后动脉、枕动脉，还有对侧的同名血管沟通吻合。	The parietal branch of the STA is commonly the larger of the two terminal branches, and curves cranially and posteriorly to anastomose with the posterior auricular and occipital arteries, as well as the parietal branch of the STA on the opposite side. The parietal branch of the STA runs superficial to the temporalis fascia.
额支则往上、往前，与眶上动脉和额动脉交通。	The frontal branch runs cranially and anteriorly to anastomose with the supraorbital and frontal arteries.
STA-MCA搭桥	STA-MCA REVASCULARIZATION
术者必须具备扎实的显微外科技术。	Familiarity with microsurgical techniques is pertinent in execution of this procedure.
麻醉、监测、准备阶段	Anesthesia, Monitoring and the Initial Steps
脑缺血患者的代偿机制已大部分耗竭，任何明显的血压或通气变化都将导致灾难性的卒中。	Patients with cerebrovascular ischemia have exhausted most of their cerebral reserve. Any marked change in blood pressure or ventilation can lead to devastating ischemic effects.
因此，手术全程应该时时关注有创动脉压、维持正常的血碳酸水平，并留置中心静脉导管。	Accordingly, blood pressure should be tightly controlled with invasive monitoring and normocapnia should be maintained throughout surgery. A central venous catheter is placed.
鉴于这些患者极易暴露于缺血性损伤的危害，推荐临时阻断MCA分支时监测脑电图、运动诱发电位和体感诱发电位，任何电位改变均需立刻采取措施改善相关血压参数。	Electroencephalography (EEG), motor evoked or somatosensory evoked potential monitoring are recommended during temporary MCA branch clipping because of the vulnerability of these patients to the resultant ischemic insults. Any change in the potentials requires an immediate response with improvement in blood pressure parameters.
并且使用巴比妥或丙泊酚降低血流被临时阻断后的脑组织代谢，将患者的血压升高基础值的20%左右。	Further, during the period of temporary clipping and anastomosis, the patient might be placed under metabolic burst suppression using barbiturates or Diprivan (propofol). The patient’s blood pressure should be increased approximately 20% above baseline during that time.
为了避免临时阻断时和吻合口发生血栓栓塞，在阻断血管3min前静脉注射2000-3000U肝素。	To avoid thromboembolic complications at the sites of anastomosis and temporary clipping, 2000 to 3000 units of heparin are administered intravenously 3 minutes before vascular occlusion.
患者取仰卧位，头架固定，头向对侧旋转30-45°，头顶稍微垂向地面以便吻合血管时借助重力作用清除术区的液体。	The patient is situated in the supine position, with the head immobilized in a skull clamp. The head is turned 30° to 45° toward the contralateral side. I tilt the vertex of the head slightly toward the floor to use gravity to clear away the operative field of fluids during the performance of anastomosis.
体位摆放完成后，微型多普勒定位STA主干及额、顶分支并做好标记。	After proper fixation, a miniDoppler probe is used for localization and marking of the route of the STA trunk and its frontal and parietal branches. The site is then properly prepared.
应避免局部注射肾上腺素/利多卡因以防供血动脉痉挛。	Local injections of xylocaine/adrenaline are avoided to prevent spasm of the STA and its branches.
术者取坐位，托手架安置双臂以减轻疲劳和手部震颤，舒适的体位有助于更好地施展显微操作。	I strongly recommend the sitting position for the surgeon and properly positioned armrests to avoid arm fatigue and hand tremor. These comfort measures advance the pleasure of performing microsurgery for me.
图2：患者头部头架固定，对侧偏45°左右，头顶稍微垂向地面。	Figure 2: The patient’s head is fixed in a skull clamp and rotated approximately 45 degrees toward the contralateral side; the vertex is tilted slightly toward the floor.
多普勒辅助下描记STA走形，并沿其途径设计切口。	Using a Doppler probe, the route of the STA is mapped and the incision over this route is marked.
动脉血流为搏动性，有别于周围持续性“嗡嗡”流动的静脉。	Care must be taken to differentiate the pulsating arterial flow from the surrounding continuous venous hum.
图3：手术切口一般起自颧弓根处的STA主干附近，然后沿顶支走形。	Figure 3: The incision typically extends from the origin of the STA trunk at the root of zygoma and along the course of its parietal branch.
偶然情况下，额支管径更粗，此时应沿额支设计弧形切口并将其分离出来。	Occasionally, the frontal branch is more dominant and a curvilinear incision is used and the donor frontal branch is harvested from underneath the scalp flap.
未完全游离或存在扭转的STA很容易出现闭塞，必须予以避免。	A generous piece of the artery should be targeted as stretched or twisted STAs carry a significant risk of occlusion.
分离STA分支	Harvesting the STA Branches(s)
STA若有损伤可能就无法供后续搭桥使用了，因此要在显微镜或头戴式放大镜下进行分离。	STA harvesting should be performed under magnification of the microscope or surgical loups to avoid injurious dissection, which could render the vessel not amenable for use.
切口起自颧弓水平的STA，沿顶支走形延伸至颞上线，锐性分离血管。	The incision is preferably commenced at the origin of the STA at the level of the zygoma and extended toward the superior temporal line along the course of the parietal branch using sharp dissection.
逆向游离STA技术操作相对简单，所以可以从切口远端向颧弓方向切开头皮。	However this dissection is technically easier if performed visa versa and I therefore, start the incision at its distal end and work toward the zygoma.
头皮不能切开太深以防误伤，	Early in dissection, the surgeon must take care not to incise deeply to avoid inadvertent injury to the vessel.
将一小丛结缔组织连同STA分离对于预防血管痉挛很重要。	Maintaining a connective cuff of tissue around the STA is key in avoiding subsequent vasospasm.
烧灼离断细小分支，避免撕裂血管。	The surrounding collaterals are carefully isolated, coagulated, and divided. Their avulsion injury must be avoided.
图4：切口沿STA设计，但超出STA远端。由预定切口的远端向近端切开头皮。	Figure 4: The initial incision may be conducted more distally along the length of the STA and carried proximally.
STA及其分支位于皮下组织层，未寻找到顶支之前，切忌切开过深以防误伤。	Before the parietal branch is identified, the surgeon must take care not to incise too deeply to avoid injuring the STA and its branches within their subcutaneous course.
而辨认顶支之后，使用蚊式钳轻柔地在血管表面做钝性分离，	After distal identification of the vessel, Mosquito clamps are used to gently and bluntly dissect over the vessel.
并抬起浅层的软组织方便安全切开。	Next, the clamp is used to elevate the superficial soft tissue layer away from the vessel while a knife is used to cut the superficial tissues.
重复上述步骤分离STA直至颧弓处。	These steps are repeated until the vessel is dissected close to the zygomatic arch.
图5：控制带套住STA、避免对其进行直接操作，可降低血管痉挛风险。	Figure 5: Vessel loops are used to handle the artery; its direct manipulation is avoided to prevent vasospasm.
颧弓根附近的STA主干走形迂曲，彻底将其松解有利于增加供血动脉的长度。	The length of the STA donor vessel may be slightly increased via further dissection around the tortuous STA trunk at the root of zygoma.
左图为使用缝线牵开头皮。	Sutures are used to mobilize and retract the scalp layers (left).
右图中清晰可见游离的STA仍有其他软组织附着，目的是为了保护血管。	Note that the soft tissues immediately around the STA are left intact to protect the vessel (right image).
分离STA时若有小的损伤出血，盲目烧灼并不可取，	In case of a minor injury to the vessel during dissection, blind coagulation of the wall should be avoided.
应该仔细寻找出血点，之后小棉片压迫，最终准确灼烧止血；	I identify the exact site of the bleeding and tamponade it using a small piece of cotton followed by precise coagulation of the bleeding site.
若破口比较大，可用10-0的线间断缝合。	In the case of a sizable defect in the STA’s lumen, interrupted 10.0 sutures may be used to repair the defect.
同时保留、游离STA额支作为备选，或者进行双重血管搭桥。	The frontal branch is not to be sacrificed and may be dissected as well, as an alternative choice, or for use in case of double-barrel bypass.
标记血管的上表面，以便后续移动、吻合血管时不会出现扭转。	The superior surface of the vessel should be marked to avoid its twisting during its mobilization and anastomosis.
保持游离血管的完整性，实施吻合之前再将其远端离断，因此，若术中无法找到足够管径的皮层动脉，还有机会行间接血流重建。	After the harvest is complete, the vessel and connective cuff are left intact or in continuity until it is time for anastomosis. The vessel is not usually disconnected distally until I am ready to perform the anastomosis. This technique provides an opportunity for an indirect bypass if an adequate cortical recipient vessel is not found.
图6：左图为STA全长被一片薄的异体硬脑膜或外科手套包裹，右图演示分离颞肌和切开颅骨时在包裹材料上缝合数针连同STA牵离术区。	Figure 6: I wrap the length of the vessel within a thin piece of allograft dura or surgical glove (left).  Next, retention sutures in the wrapping material mobilize the vessel away from my working zone during performance of the muscle dissection and craniotomy (right).
随后沿STA纵轴垂直切开颞肌，颞上线下缘做另一切口，分离颞肌充分暴露颅骨。	After retracting the vessel aside, a vertical incision is made into the temporalis muscle in line with the long axis of the STA, which is also mobilized to expose the temporal bone. Another incision within the muscle just inferior to the superior temporal line allows adequate mobilization of the muscle.
该步骤中，助手使用宽的牵开器保护STA。	The assistant protects the STA with a wide retractor blade.
以鳞状缝为中心取下直径6cm的骨瓣，意在暴露外侧裂。	Next, a craniotomy flap, 6cm in diameter, centered over the squamosal suture and exposing the Sylvian fissure is elevated.
解剖受血动脉	Dissection of the Recipient Artery
星形剪开硬膜充分显露大脑皮质，	A stellate dural opening provides adequate cortical exposure.
同时在近端STA附近纵行切开硬膜容纳供血动脉穿过。	A vertical dural incision is made at the root of the harvested STA to allow its transdural tunneling during closure.
每一步操作都必须彻底止血，为吻合血管营造洁净的术野。	Immaculate hemostasis at every step is critical to avoid run-in of blood during the anastomosis.
选取合适的MCA皮层支进行搭桥非常重要，	The proper choice of a cortical MCA branch for anastomosis is critically important.
选择标准包括血管的可及性、管径以及近远两端是否具有良好的血管床。	The selection criteria for this branch include its accessibility, caliber, as well as its apparent proximal and distal vascular beds.
一般情况下，理想的受血动脉是至少0.9mm粗的M3或M4。	In most cases, an M3 or M4 branch of about 0.9 mm or more in diameter is ideal.
如果STA比较大或者需要完全替代MCA的血流（高流量搭桥），M2是更合适的选择。	In case of a large STA or total replacement of MCA flow (high-flow bypass), an M2 branch may be the proper recipient choice.
位于发生过缺血事件和软化脑区的动脉苍白而扁平，应予以舍弃。	White and flattened arteries at areas of previous ischemic events and encephalomalacia should be avoided.
垂直外侧裂走形的受血动脉在进行吻合时工作角度更佳，推荐为首选。	I prefer to find the recipient vessel that is perpendicular to the Sylvian fissure as this working angle promotes easy suturing.
供血动脉远端要能够到达受血动脉并有些许剩余，以促进间接血管重建。	The location of the recipient vessel should allow the distal end of the donor vessel to reach for the anastomosis with some redundancy that can promote indirect revascularization.
确认受血动脉后，松解周围的蛛网膜粘连。	Once a suitable branch is identified, arachnoid adherences around the vessel are released.
调低双极的电凝功率，防止烧灼过程中出现误伤。	During any coagulation process, the electrocautery power should be reduced to avoid injury to the recipient cortical branch.
适当使用罂粟碱溶液冲洗术区预防、缓解血管痉挛。	I apply liberal amounts of papaverine solution to the field to avoid or relieve vasospasm.
测量游离的STA及其分支的长度，确保可以实现无张力吻合，如果过短，松解STA主干近端额外获得少许延长。	The length of the donor STA branch is measured with a ruler to ensure an appropriate length of the vessel for a tension-free anastomosis. If the STA branch appears too short, liberal dissection at the root of the STA will add an slight extension to the vessel.
STA的长度应该是既能满足无张力吻合，又不能过于冗长，否则搭桥开放后会引起STA扭转甚至血流中断。	Not only should anastomosis under tension be avoided, but a redundantly long vessel is also unwanted, as it may promote twisting and disruption of flow after the anastomosis is complete.
吻合血管之前，在受血动脉底面置入一块带颜色的橡胶垫片映衬几乎透明的中空血管。	Finally, a colored rubber dam is placed underneath the recipient vessel to aid with visualization of an almost transparent empty artery at the time of the anastomosis.
有时需要牺牲1-2根由游离受血动脉发出的小穿支以便这段血管可以在橡胶垫片上自由移动。	It may be necessary to sacrifice one or two small perforating arteries originating from the dissected segment of the recipient vessel to allow its mobilization over the rubber dam.
图7：完成开颅、确定合适的MCA分支作为受血动脉后，临时阻断夹夹闭近端STA，接着如图示去除其远端5-10mm范围内的结缔组织，斜行修剪断端或使其成“鱼嘴样”以增加吻合口面积。	Figure 7: After the craniotomy is performed and a suitable MCA recipient branch is identified, the proximal STA is clamped using a temporary clip, and the its distal end is divided and prepared for anastomosis as shown by removing the connective tissue off its terminal 5–10 mm end. The distal end of the donor vessel is cut obliquely or “fish mouthed,” allowing for an increased anastomotic surface
血管吻合	Anastomosis
短暂松开STA近端的阻断夹，清理管腔内的碎渣并用肝素盐水冲洗。	The aneurysm clip on the proximal STA is released momentarily to clear its lumen of debris and the vessel is flushed with heparinized saline.
图8：随后两个迷你夹阻断MCA皮层支，使用眼科海狸刀或钻石刀等若干刀片完成“钻石样”动脉造口，显微剪将其长度延伸至约为供血动脉远端断口的2-3倍，可剪取一段5mm长的量尺进行这些测量。	Figure 8: The cortical MCA branch is then temporarily clip occluded using two miniclips, and a diamond-shaped arteriotomy is completed using a number of different blades, including a beaver ophthalmic blade or diamond knife. This arteriotomy is then extended using microscissors to about 2–3 times the diameter of the distal end of the STA branch. A 5-mm segment of the ruler is cut and used for these measurements.
显微镊夹提血管时，只能夹管壁外层（动脉外膜），而不能是内层，否则会损伤内膜甚至导致动脉夹层。	When I use the microforceps to handle the donor and recipient vessel walls, I am careful to apply traction only on the outer wall layers (adventitia) rather than the inner layers, which would result in intimal injury and possibly intimal dissection.
肝素盐水间断冲洗管腔预防临时阻断相关的血栓栓塞。	The lumen is periodically irrigated with heparinized saline as a precaution against thromboembolic consequences of clamping.
图9：演示吻合开始时的足跟、趾头对拢。	Figure 9: The initial heel and toe sutures of the anastomosis are illustrated.
使用9-0或者10-0的不可吸收线，先足跟部后趾头部将STA远端缝合至受血动脉的相应部位。	Using 9-0 or 10-0 nonabsorbable sutures, the heel followed by the toe of the distal end of the STA is sutured to the complementary ends of the recipient artery.
缝针由外向内穿入STA，由内向外穿出受血的MCA分支。	The sutures are placed from an outside-to-inside direction in the STA and an inside-to-outside direction on the recipient MCA branch.
最后，10-0的缝线间断缝合跟、趾两线之间的端-侧吻合口。	Finally, interrupted 10-0 sutures complete the end-to-side anastomosis of the STA to the MCA arteriotomy between the two initial heel and toe sutures.
吻合口的侧边要么用2根缝线连续缝合，要么间断缝合8-10针。	The sides of the anastomosis are secured using either two running sutures or eight to ten interrupted sutures, starting with the less accessible side first.
先吻合操作难度大的一侧，所以在闭合对侧之前可以从管腔内检查该侧的吻合情况。	This method allows examination of the arteriotomy closure from inside the vessel lumen before closure of the opposite side.
若采用连续缝合技术，使线圈保持松弛直至最末一针穿出以及肝素盐水再次冲洗，随后将其理顺依次抽紧并打结。	If the running suture technique is employed, the running ties are left loose until the final tie is placed and the vessel is flushed with heparinized saline; only then are the sutures tightened and the final knot created.
图10：应谨记缝针的穿行顺序：在供血动脉为由外向内，受血动脉则相反。	Figure 10: Care should be taken to suture the donor vessel from outside to inside and vice versa on the recipient vessel.
如果采用的是间断缝合技术，完成最后一针之前冲洗管腔。	If the interrupted suture technique is used, flushing is done before the final tie is placed.
注意保持缝针始终与动脉壁垂直以免线孔过大和戳裂管壁。	The needle should be turned during its passage through the walls of the vessels to avoid creation of large suture holes and tearing.
受血动脉上大的破口不可被埋藏于缝线内否则会造成吻合口狭窄。	Large bites of the walls of the recipient artery should not be incorporated into the suture line as this will lead to stenosis at the site of the anastomosis.
即使是很轻柔的动作，显微镊也容易扯断10-0的缝线，因此只有缝针可以被夹取。	Only the needle is manipulated, and the suture is left untouched because 10-0 sutures are prone to fracture with minimal manipulation by the forceps.
直视下穿入、穿出缝针，盲目操作可能会同时穿透受血动脉的两壁引起闭塞，必须予以禁止。	The needle is passed through the walls under direct vision, and blind insertion is strictly avoided because this will lead to inadvertent incorporation of both walls of the recipient vessel and its occlusion.
吻合结束后移除阻断夹，顺序是：先MCA远端，其次MCA近端，最终STA近端。	After completion of the anastomosis, the clips are removed in an orderly fashion, starting with the distal MCA, followed by the proximal MCA clip, and finally the proximal STA clip.
若吻合口处有小的出血，使用可吸收性止血纱或其他止血材料轻轻压塞足以控制。	Minor leaks along the anastomosis can be easily controlled with gentle tamponade using absorbable Surgicel or other hemostatic agents.
如果是比较严重的出血就需要重新阻断血管来缝合漏口。	If significant leakage is evident, an additional suture may be placed after reinstallment of the clips.
关颅前，使用微型多普勒和/或荧光血管造影评估搭桥血流。	Before closure, the anastomosis is assessed using a microDoppler probe and/or fluorescence videoangiography.
无法确定吻合的质量时也可以行术中造影证实。	Intraoperative angiography may also be performed if the quality of the anastomosis remains in doubt.
图11：STA-MCA搭桥时，采用连续缝合技术可能会有缝线在吻合口内侧缠结，间断缝合则可以降低该风险，	Figure 11: I prefer the use of interrupted sutures during the STA-MCA revascularization to minimize the risk of kinking within the anastomosis, which is possible with a running-suturing technique.
但是完成吻合的时间要延长，个人倾向选择后者。	However, the interrupted technique requires a longer period of clamping for its execution.
切记供血动脉必须是没有张力和扭转存在。	The donor vessel should lay on the brain surface under no tension and remain untwisted.
如果搭桥不通畅就要怀疑是否存在吻合口阻塞。	If graft patency is not apparent, occlusion of the anastomosis site is suspected.
剪开一侧的缝线，移除管腔内的血凝块，	We reopen one side of the suture line and remove the clot in the lumen of the vessels.
暂时性的供血动脉出血可以被接受。	The donor vessel is allowed to bleed for short period.
然后肝素盐水冲刷所有血管，再封闭吻合口。	Heparin irrigation is used to flush all of the vessels and the suture line is reconstructed.
如果仍然不通畅，只要STA还能使用，就可以选取另外一根受血动脉重新搭桥。	If this maneuver is not effective, another recipient vessel may be selected and the procedure repeated as long as the STA is functional.
不同于常规的关颅方式，此时，应使硬膜切口的下缘保持开放免得引起STA狭窄。	Unlike the conventional craniotomy closure, the inferior margin of the dural opening is not closed in order to avoid STA stenosis.
针对Moyamoya患者，翻转硬膜并用骨膜或者肌肉瓣替代，以便促进新生血管形成。	In addition, for patients with Moyamoya disease, the dural flap may be reversed and replaced by a periosteal or muscular flap to enhance neovascularization.
同理，裁剪骨瓣下缘，并且不能对合STA在颞肌的穿行部位。	Similarly, the bone flap is trimmed at its inferior margin, and the temporalis muscle is not approximated near the entry site of the STA branch.
最后，仔细缝合皮肤，切记不可损伤下方的STA。	Finally, the skin closure is completed with meticulous care to avoid any injury to the underlying donor vessel.
浅层的缝线过密可能会导致皮肤开裂和伤口感染，也要予以避免。	However, placement of excessively superficial sutures, which may result in skin dehiscence and wound infection, should be avoided.
不可加压包扎头部，术后早期嘱咐患者休息时不要压迫术侧。	A noncompressive head bandage is applied and the patient should avoid sleeping on the side of the anastomosis for the first few days after surgery.
术后24-48h内入ICU，严密监测任何血管痉挛或脑缺血的征象。	Careful observation in the intensive care unit for any signs of underlying vasospasm or ischemia during the first 24 to 48 hours after surgery is recommended.
每日使用床旁经皮微型多普勒设备观察STA的搏动。	The STA pulse is monitored daily using a bedside transcutaneous microDoppler device.
术后即刻维持血压于基础值或稍高水平（一般是110-140mmHg）。	Blood pressure should be maintained within each patient’s normotensive or slightly hypertensive level (typically 110–140 mm Hg) immediately after surgery.
患者继续终身服用阿司匹林。	Aspirin is continued indefinitely.
加强伤口管理可以预防伤口裂开和感染。	Adequate wound care is vital to avoid dehiscence and wound infection.
图12：患者出院后定期随诊复查导管造影或者CTA来评价搭桥的通畅性。	Figure 12: Graft patency is assessed during subsequent follow-up exams after discharge using conventional angiography or CTA.
此例行左侧STA-MCA搭桥的患者其桥血管保持畅通（右图为三维重建影像）。	In this angiogram, the left STA-MCA bypass is patent (three-dimensional reconstruction image, right).
对于Moyamoya病或术前血流动力学代偿能力所剩无几的患者，术后常有一过性神经功能恶化，而且影像学检查可以无异常。	It is not unusual for patients with Moyamoya disease and minimal hemodynamic reserve to neurologically worsen temporarily during the postoperative period, even in the absence of any obvious imaging findings.
这个现象反映了即便是做到仔细监测、术中稍微上调血压等措施，灌注已相当微弱的大脑半球也非常容易发生小的缺血事件。	This phenomenon reflects the remarkably tenuous perfusion status of their hemisphere, prone to minor ischemic events despite carefully monitored and slightly hypertensive intraoperative measures.
间接搭桥	Indirect Bypass
有些患者没有足够管径的供血、受血动脉进行直接搭桥，还有些患者之前已经做过搭桥手术再无合适的血管。	Some patients do not have donor and recipient vessels of appropriate size for direct revascularization.  In addition, some patients have gone previous revascularization procedures and therefore do not harbor suitable vessels.
此时，可以实施间接血管重建，包括脑-硬膜-动脉-血管连通术（EDAS）、脑-肌血管连通术、颅骨膜贴附和带蒂大网膜移植等。	In these circumstances, I employ indirect revascularization techniques including encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis (EDAS), encephalomyosynangiosis, pericranium onlay and pedicled omental transposition.
随后，新生血管的形成将为低灌注的脑组织提供相当可观的血流量。	Delayed neovascularization leads to impressive blood flow to the hypoperfused hemispheres.
如果EDAS不可行，颞肌和骨膜敷贴是合理的替代方案。	If EDAS is not feasible, onlay of the temporalis muscle and pericranium are reasonable alternatives.
脑-硬膜-动脉-血管连通术	Encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis
手术起始步骤也是游离STA、显露脑组织，方法同前述的直接搭桥。	The initial steps of the operation regarding the STA harvest and exposure are the same as the direct bypass procedure discussed above.
注意不要离断STA远端，并连同部分软组织一起做分离。	The STA is not disconnected and a wide soft tissue cuff is maintained along the STA.
切开硬膜，接着广泛松解覆盖于包括外侧裂在内脑沟的蛛网膜。	After the dura is incised, the arachnoid layers covering the sulci including the sylvian fissure are widely opened.
随后把游离的STA与附着的软组织袖带放置于脑表面，	Next, the STA and soft tissue cuff are placed over the exposed brain surface.
撕裂蛛网膜带可以促进新生血管从STA及其附着物长出。	Stripping the arachnoid bands promotes ingrowth of neovascularization from the STA and soft tissue cuff.
有些外科医师会将STA和下方的脑组织用10-0的软膜缝线缝合数针确保两者接触良好。	Some colleagues tack the STA cuff to the underlying brain using 10-0 pial sutures to maintain direct tissue apposition.
塑形骨瓣之后回纳，避免压迫到STA。	Prior to replacement of the bone, the flap should be contoured to allow unimpeded entry and exit of the STA.
持续发展的血管重建技术	Developing Technology for Revascularization Procedures
最近涌现出了许多新的技术手段，目的在于简化显微血管吻合。	A number of new technologies have recently been introduced with the goal of making the process of microvascular anastomosis less technically demanding.
尽管它们如今还不能取代传统的显微外科缝合技术，但是其强大的潜力和希望在不断得到体现。	Although none of these technologies has yet been able to replace microsurgical suture anastomosis, they have recently displayed great potential and promise.
纤维蛋白粘合剂（fibrin sealants）的功能类似于缝线，处理难以吻合的部位时优势明显，可以实现无缝线化吻合。	Fibrin sealants can potentially be used to perform sutureless anastomoses. These sealants may function as multiple sutures within the anastomosis line, allowing accessibility to difficult sites.
另外一种新型工具就是线夹（suture clips），与订皮机非常相似，目前有两种：非穿透式钛夹和自动闭合式U形夹。	Another option is suture clips, which greatly resemble skin-closure staples and are available in two forms; nonpenetrating titanium clips and self-closing U-clips.
应用准分子激光辅助的无阻断式吻合（the excimer laser-assisted nonocclusive anastomosis，ELANA）技术，即吻合完成后在受血动脉管腔内刺入准分子激光探针开放吻合部位，因此避开了临时阻断血管带来的不良反应。	In an attempt to avoid the adverse effects of temporary vessel occlusion, the excimer laser-assisted nonocclusive anastomosis (ELANA) technique has been designed.  An arteriotomy is formed by passing an excimer laser probe through the lumen of the recipient vessel after attachment of the donor vessel.
尽管这些新进展促进了更理想化脑血管吻合的实现，但是如何将其更好地应用于神经外科还有许多问题需要解决，比如不够微型化。	These new technologies, although very valuable in facilitating more ideal cerebrovascular anastomoses, have yet to overcome a number of limitations for optimal use in neurosurgery, including adequate miniaturization.
高流量搭桥	High Flow Revascularization
20世纪60年代早期，Woringer 首次报道高流量的颈外动脉-颈内动脉（EC-IC）搭桥，由此开启了脑血管显微外科技术时代。	The advent of microneurovascular techniques began in the early 1960s when Woringer reported the first high-flow (HF) extracranial-intracranial (EC-IC) bypass procedure.
尽管Woringer的尝试因为技术复杂、并发症发生率高在起初并未被广泛接受，但这的确是脑血管重建领域里一个伟大的进步。	Although Woringer's technique was not initially popularized because of its complexity and the associated high morbidity, his progress was a major evolution in the field of cerebral revascularization.
直至上世纪70年代伊始，医药和外科技术的不断进展再次引起了人们对搭桥手术的兴趣。	It was not until the early 1970s when further medical and surgical advancements renewed interest in this form of vascularization.
1971年，William Lougheed以大隐静脉为桥血管实施了颈总动脉-颅内段颈内动脉搭桥并获得成功，随后，在此基础上，其他外科医师将这项技术进行改进并应用到颅内动脉瘤、缺血性脑血管病和颅底肿瘤的治疗。	In 1971, William Lougheed performed a common carotid artery (CCA) to intracranial internal carotid artery (ICH) bypass with an interposition saphenous vein graft. His success paved the way for other surgeons to refine its use for treatment of cerebral aneurysms, ischemic vascular disease, and skull base tumors.
EC-IC搭桥技术难度大、适应征局限，因此即便在现代神经外科中使用仍然不频繁。	Because of its technical complexity and limited surgical indications, EC-IC bypass is infrequently performed, even in modern day neurosurgery.
实施该手术前，有许多事项需要加以考虑，包括：选择合适病例、选用何种搭桥术式、技术要点、个体解剖学特征。	There are numerous considerations for performing an EC-IC bypass, including optimal patient selection, technical performance, selection of the appropriate bypass procedure, and the individual patient’s anatomic constraints.
搭桥手术分类	Classification of Revascularization Techniques
几乎每一根颅内动脉都曾被作为受血血管进行脑血流重建。	Cerebral revascularization has been described as involving almost every intracranial artery.
总体上有低流量、EC-IC的高流量和IC-IC的原位重建三种方式，应根据受血动脉的血流量需求以及是否有合适的供血血管来选择手术方式。	In general, these techniques are classified as either low-flow or high-flow EC-IC, or IC-IC (in situ) bypasses. The indications for a particular technique are based on the anticipated recipient’s demand of cerebral blood flow, as well as the availability of an appropriate donor source.
低流量供血动脉提供的血流量少于50ml/min（15-25ml/min），高流量者则可超过50ml/min（70-140ml/min）。	Low-flow donor vessels provide less than 50 mL/min (15–25 mL/min) of blood flow to the recipient vessel, while high-flow conduits provide more than 50 mL/min (70-140 mL/min) of blood flow.
低流量搭桥包括以颞浅动脉（STA）或枕动脉（OA）为供血血管将其吻合至颅内中等大小的动脉，比如STA与远端MCA（STA-MCA）搭桥，当然，小脑上动脉（SCA）或大脑后动脉（PCA）也可以作为受血动脉。	Examples of a low-flow technique include the use of the superficial temporal artery (STA) or occipital artery (OA) as donor vessels to anastomose with and support various medium-size intracranial recipient arteries. One such example is STA to distal middle cerebral artery (MCA) (STA-MCA) anastomosis, although other recipient arteries, such as the distal superior cerebellar artery (SCA) or posterior cerebral artery (PCA), have also been used.
STA-MCA搭桥应用最为广泛，在“低流量搭桥”一章中已详细阐述。	The STA-MCA bypass is the most widely used revascularization technique and is discussed in its own chapter.
IC-IC原位吻合属于低流量搭桥，特别适合大脑前动脉（A3-A3搭桥）和小脑后下动脉（PICA-PICA搭桥）的复杂动脉瘤，该技术的优点为所吻合的两根血管管径相近、桥血管就位于颅内且所需长度短。	In situ, IC-IC bypasses are typically low flow and are especially favored during complex aneurysm surgery involving the anterior cerebral artery (A3-A3) and posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA-PICA). In situ bypasses have the advantages of using caliber-matched donor and recipient arteries, along with a relatively short graft that remains protected inside the cranium.
与低流量搭桥目的在于扩充受血动脉血流量不同，高流量搭桥以大管径血管为桥血管（一般取大隐静脉或非优势型的桡动脉），提供可靠的血流替代，比如使用桡动脉连接颈外动脉（ECA）与M2的一支。	High-flow bypasses utilize larger caliber donor vessels with interposition grafts (usually nondominant radial artery or saphenous vein) and promote reliable flow replacement rather than augmentation (low-flow bypass). An example of a high-flow bypass involves a radial artery interposition graft, anastomosing the external carotid artery (ECA) branch with one of the M2s.
适应征	Indications for Revascularization
脑血管重建手术主要有两个适应征：	Cerebrovascular revascularization surgery is performed for two main general indications:
1.为Moyamoya或严重颅内动脉粥样硬化等难治性慢性缺血性脑病患者提供脑血流量扩充。	1.Flow augmentation to treat refractory chronic cerebral ischemia in patients with Moyamoya disease or severe intracranial atherosclerosis
2.为因复杂脑血管病变或颅底肿瘤治疗需要而牺牲颅内血管的患者进行脑血流替代。	2.Flow replacement when treating complex cerebrovascular pathology or skull base tumors requiring acute vessel sacrifice.
一般低流量搭桥用于需扩充血流量的病例，高流量搭桥则用于需进行血流替代者。	Low-flow bypasses are typically performed in cases of flow augmentation, whereas high-flow bypasses are used for flow replacement.
尽管似乎有神经生理学依据支持脑血管重建，但是并没有I类证据支持EC-IC或IC-IC搭桥。	Although there is a seemingly sound neurophysiologic basis for the use of cerebral revascularization techniques, there is no class I evidence to support the use of EC-IC or IC-IC bypass for any indication.
此外，有许多研究（EC-IC搭桥试验和颈动脉闭塞手术试验）表明脑血流重建手术具有相当高的死亡率和并发症，尤其术者经验不足时。	Moreover, there is a body of literature (EC-IC Bypass Study and the Carotid Occlusion Surgery Study) that suggests cerebral revascularization may have high morbidity and mortality, especially in inexperienced hands;
因此，搭桥手术的适应征目前仍然很局限而且广受争议。	therefore, current indications for bypass procedures remain relatively limited and controversial.
尽管前述研究结果令人失望，目前学界还是公认EC-IC高流量搭桥手术适应征为因治疗颅内复杂动脉瘤或颅底肿瘤而需要牺牲大、中血管。	Despite unfavorable results from the aforementioned studies, the modern indications for high-flow EC-IC bypass include vessel sacrifice during intracranial aneurysm clip ligation procedures or complex skull base tumor resections, necessitating moderate to large size vessel sacrifice.
复杂的颅内动脉瘤	Complex Cerebral Aneurysms
复杂颅内动脉瘤包括巨大型（有分支血管从瘤壁发出）、分叶型、宽颈型、梭形、钙化型和巨肠形的动脉瘤，因为这类动脉瘤的不典型性病理解剖学特征，它们不能像囊状动脉瘤那样可以通过显微手术夹闭或血管内栓塞获得成功治疗。	Complex cerebral aneurysms include those that are giant (with aberrant branches originating from the wall of the aneurysm), multilobed, wide-necked, fusiform, calcified, or dolichoectatic. This subset of aneurysms are classified as such because of their atypical pathoanatomy that precludes successful treatment with primary microsurgical clip ligation or endovascular embolization techniques, in contrast to their saccular counterparts.
夹闭动脉瘤需要瘤颈显露满意、近端载瘤动脉可控、保护分支动脉和小穿支、瘤颈形态相对规则具有可塑性并能被夹闭。	Successful aneurysm clip ligation requires surgical access to the aneurysm neck, preparation of the proximal vessel(s) for vascular control, preservation of the essential perforators and distal arterial branches, and a pliable and relatively distinct aneurysm neck that can be collapsed using clip blades.
复杂动脉瘤的夹闭必须牺牲某些载瘤或分支血管，不符合上述原则；而介入治疗对这些瘤壁累及供血动脉分支的动脉瘤并不能奏效；如此，复杂动脉瘤的最终治疗手段就只能是血管搭桥了。	These basic tenets of aneurysm surgery cannot be implemented for complex aneurysms that necessitate sacrifice of some of the parent or branching vessels. Endovascular techniques are also less successful in aneurysms with wide necks where outflow arteries are incorporated into the aneurysm wall. Cerebral revascularization may remain the last resort.
图1：左侧颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤，大小6cm，伴钙化和部分血栓形成，传统的显微手术夹闭不可行。	Figure 1: A 6-cm partially thrombotic and calcified left ICA bifurcation aneurysm is shown. Traditional clip ligation methodologies are not effective.
治疗方案为：颅外段ICA-M2的高流量搭桥、结扎脉络前动脉以远的ICA（Hunter方式）、阻断同侧A1逆流进入瘤腔的血流。	This patient underwent a high-flow extracranial ICA-M2 bypass and Hunterian ligation of the ICA distal to the anterior choroidal artery. The flow into the aneurysm sac via the ipsilateral A1 was also clip occluded.
后文有展示本例术中情况的图片。	Please see the intraoperative photos below for my surgical findings in this case.
颅底肿瘤	Skull Base Tumors
个别罕见的颅底肿瘤会包裹临近的动脉，为了实现全切，必须切除受累血管。	In rare cases, skull base tumors encase neighboring arteries and require sacrifice of a major vessel to allow gross total tumor resection.
颈内动脉在颅底的特殊走形使得它是最常被评估能否牺牲掉的血管。	The carotid artery is the most common vessel evaluated for sacrifice because of its strategic location within the skull base.
相当部分的患者可以耐受颈动脉闭塞并通过球囊阻塞试验（BTO），	A relatively large subset of patients may tolerate carotid vessel occlusion and pass the balloon test occlusion (BTO).
然而高达30%的BTO阴性者结扎颈动脉后依然会出现脑缺血。	Despite favorable results from the BTO, up to 30% of patients still suffer from postoperative ischemia after carotid sacrifice.
因此，通过外科手术或介入方式闭塞血管前经常需要进行血管搭桥。	Revascularization is often performed prior to surgical or endovascular parent vessel occlusion to reduce these risks.
绝大多数颅底肿瘤为良性，而且残留病变的放疗效果好，先搭桥后彻底切除肿瘤的风险远甚于收益，笔者极少使用。	I employ revascularization exceedingly rarely for resection of skull base tumors because the risks outweigh the benefits. Most of these tumors are benign, and the residual tumor is amenable to radiosurgery.
创伤后动脉夹层和假性动脉瘤	Post-Traumatic Dissections and Pseudoaneurysms
颅内动脉夹层和假性动脉瘤的形成可以是自发性或者创伤性，对于保守或介入治疗效果均不佳的难治性病例，可能需要牺牲病变血管来降低卒中或蛛网膜下腔出血的风险。	Intracranial dissections and pseudoaneurysms may form spontaneously or after a traumatic event. Refractory or persistent cases of intracranial dissection or pseudoaneurysm not responsive to conservative therapy or amenable to endovascular treatment may require parent vessel sacrifice to reduce the risk of stroke or subarachnoid hemorrhage.
尽管搭桥手术是治疗这类顽疾的有效手段，但是新兴的血管内支架技术将搭桥手术的使用范围进一步缩窄。	Although bypass for intracranial dissections and pseudoaneurysms is an effective treatment, newer endovascular stenting techniques have limited its application.
粥样斑块闭塞性疾病	Athero-Occlusive Disease
患者常常出现短暂性脑缺血发作或者卒中，尤其是伴有低血压时；	Patients with medically refractory ischemic complications secondary to cerebral athero-occlusive disease benefit from flow augmentation.
也可能存在颅内或颅外血管的狭窄-闭塞性病变、血管炎或Moyamoya病。	Symptoms often manifest as transient ischemic attacks or stroke, especially in patients with hypotension.
脑血流量扩充技术可以使饱受因脑动脉粥样斑块所致闭塞性疾病造成的药物难治性缺血性并发症的患者受益。	Patients may present with extracranial or intracranial steno-occlusive disease, vasculitis, or Moyamoya disease.
若是前循环的狭窄-闭塞，药物或介入治疗无效时可考虑行EC-IC搭桥；若是后循环受累，特别是椎基底动脉的闭塞，EC-IC搭桥是最终治疗手段。	In cases of steno-occlusive disease of the anterior circulation, EC-IC bypass may be considered for patients who fail medical and endovascular treatment. In the case of posterior circulation, and especially in vertebrobasilar occlusive disease, EC-IC bypass is often considered as a last resort.
桥血管的术前评估与选择	Preoperative Graft Evaluation and Choice of Graft
术前应对准备接受脑血管重建术的患者进行详尽的评估，包括：测量桡动脉和大隐静脉的直径与长度、超声多普勒与Allen试验评价尺动脉对手掌血管弓的代偿能力。12岁以下儿童的桡动脉管径太细不适于搭桥。	Any patient scheduled to undergo an intracranial revascularization procedure should be rigorously evaluated preoperatively. This evaluation includes measuring the length and diameter of both radial arteries and saphenous veins. A Doppler ultrasound and an Allen's test assess the adequacy of ulnar collateral flow to the palmer arcades.  In children under the age of 12, the radial artery diameter may be too small for intracranial use. Radial artery and saphenous vein grafts are the most effective high-flow grafts.
最合适的高流量桥血管是桡动脉和大隐静脉，两者可以互换，但各有优缺点，选择何种取决于准备施行的搭桥方式。	Although radial artery and saphenous vein grafts are used interchangeably for high flow bypasses, each has its advantages and disadvantages. Selection of the appropriate arterial or venous interposition graft typically depends on the type of the desired bypass.
静脉性桥血管在搭桥术后可能发生血管粥样化的前驱病变，导致血栓形成的风险更高。	Venous grafts can undergo proatherogenic changes after revascularization that may lead to a higher likelihood of graft thrombosis.
心血管领域的文献也表明术后1年时桡动脉作为桥血管的通畅率更高，但目前在脑血管病领域还没有类似报告。	Despite these theoretical risks and reports from the cardiac literature demonstrating higher patency rates of the radial artery grafts at 1 year after surgery, no such studies exist in the cerebrovascular literature.
研究显示大隐静脉参与的脑血管重建在术后1，5和13年时的通畅率分别为86%，82%和73%，已经是相当高的了。	Studies evaluating saphenous vein grafts for cerebral revascularization report patency rates of 86%, 82%, and 73% at 1, 5, and 13 years after surgery, respectively.
因此，选择桡动脉而不是大隐静脉主要基于其他考虑，比如术者的偏好和受训经历。	These rates are still sufficiently high; therefore, the choice of radial artery rather than saphenous vein grafts are typically based on other considerations, such as surgeon’s preference and training bias.
桡动脉的管径和管壁厚度都与颅内中等大小的动脉（M2或P1）相似，这些优点有利于在缩短阻断时间的前提下更好地完成远端吻合口缝合和保持吻合口远期的通畅，所以，个人倾向首选桡动脉。	I prefer the radial artery grafts because they are better matched, both in caliber and wall thickness, for the medium-size intracranial arteries (M2 or P1 branches). These advantages facilitate durable distal anastomosis and reduce temporary occlusion time necessary for completion of the anastomosis.
动脉性桥血管缺乏瓣膜而且不会曲张，故操作中不易形成栓子引起阻塞；其管壁的坚韧度也大大降低了扭曲缠结的风险。	Arterial grafts are also void of valves and varices that predispose the lumen to formation of thrombus and occlusion during manipulation. The strength of these grafts’ outer walls also minimizes the risk of torsion or kinking.
桡动脉的缺点有：被从前臂切取后的潜在并发症、长度短、可能出现血管痉挛造成功能性闭塞。	The disadvantages of radial artery grafts are the potential morbidity associated with their harvest, their shorter length, and their potential association with vasospasm, which can lead to functional occlusion.
获取最大长度的桡动脉至关重要。	Harvesting the maximal length of the radial artery is critical.
可以使用钙通道阻滞剂或行血管成形预防血管痉挛，但这仍然是无法规避的不足之处。	Vasospasm can be prevented with calcium channel blockers or angioplasty, but remains a potential drawback of arterial grafts.
有时桡动脉的长度确实不够，术者不得不放弃手术。	The length of the radial artery graft can be the rate-limiting factor, leading to abortion of the procedure.
大隐静脉的壁厚和管径都比颅内的受血动脉大，这种不匹配使得吻合时技术难度更大。	Saphenous vein anastomosis may be more technically difficult to perform because of its mismatch with the recipient vessel. Saphenous veins have thicker walls and larger diameters compared to the intracranial recipient vessels.
而且，大隐静脉可承载的血流量极高，可能导致远端吻合口出现血流紊乱。	In addition, there is high-flow mismatch through the graft; this phenomenon can lead to turbulent flow at the distal anastomotic site.
但是该静脉可获取的长度达40cm，足以胜任任何搭桥术式。	On the other hand, it is possible to harvest up to 40 cm of a saphenous vein, more than adequate for any revascularization procedure.
桥血管必须要具有足够的管径（2-3mm）和至少20cm的长度，除了桡动脉和大隐静脉之外也有其他选择，只是比较少，比如胫前动脉和旋股外侧动脉，但是这些血管获取困难而且容易出现动脉粥样硬化，因此限制了它们的使用。	Alternative high-flow grafts to the radial artery and saphenous vein do exist, but the choices are limited. A suitable graft must have an adequate vessel diameter (2-3 mm) and length of at least 20 cm. Anterior tibial artery grafts for high-flow cerebrovascular bypass have been considered. The lateral circumflex femoral artery may also be used as an alternative to the radial artery and saphenous vein. In general, these alternative vessels are more technically challenging to harvest and have higher rates of atherosclerosis, complicating their use.
术前脑血管评估	Preoperative Cerebrovascular Assessment
推荐术前行导管造影检查，详细评估颈部血管和包括颞浅动脉在内的颈外动脉、Willis环与目标病变周围的血流代偿能力和血管变异情况。	Successful bypass surgery depends on a careful and detailed study of the collateral vessels and arterial variations within the circle of Willis and nearby the target pathology; therefore, catheter angiography is recommended for all patients scheduled for revascularization. Evaluation of the neck vessels and ECA, including superficial temporal artery, is indicated.
推荐行球囊阻塞试验（BTO）。	A balloon test occlusion (BTO) is recommended for arterial occlusion.
该试验能够评价侧支循环和暂时的闭塞耐受性，而不能准确预测永久阻断后是否会发生缺血性并发症，	Although BTO can assess collateral flow and tolerance to temporary occlusion, it cannot reliably predict the risk of ischemic complications after definitive or permanent arterial occlusion.
但BTO也可以从另一个角度证实搭桥手术的必要性。	However, it can confirm the need for a cerebrovascular bypass.
球囊阻塞ICA后开始观察患者神经功能状态、电生理学和影像学方面的变化，还有对外界刺激的反应。	Tolerance to ICA occlusion is assessed after temporary endovascular balloon occlusion, during which the patient is assessed for any changes in neurologic, electrophysiologic, radiographic, or in response to provocative tests for a standard period of 15 minutes.
如果15分钟的时间里始终没有任何客观证据表明存在情况恶化，就可以认为患者成功通过了ICA闭塞挑战。	If the patient remains neurologically intact without objective evidence of deterioration, the patient is deemed to have passed the ICA occlusion challenge.
进行BTO的同时评价脑血流量和加做试验性低血压可以提高结果的可靠性。	As previously mentioned, BTO should be performed in conjunction with cerebral blood flow and hypotensive challenge studies to improve the reliability of occlusion tolerance.
阻断ICA后，同侧MCA或ACA的血流量下降超过25%的患者更有可能出现缺血相关并发症，需要实施血管搭桥扩充血流量。	Patients who have a greater than 25% decrease in blood flow within the ipsilateral middle or anterior cerebral arteries after carotid occlusion are more likely to develop ischemic complications and require flow augmentation via revascularization.
个人建议，将BTO时间延长至30分钟，同时进行试验性降压（平均动脉压降低15-20mmHg），并利用CT灌注或氙-CT成像等工具评估血流量。	I recommend BTO over 30 minutes in conjunction with hypotensive challenge (mean arterial pressure reduced by 15 to 20 mm Hg) and cerebral blood flow studies (xenon computed tomography or CT perfusion).
也可以通过测量球囊远端的逆向动脉压间接反映侧支循环是否充分。	Arterial back-pressures can also be measured to indirectly assess the adequacy of collateral flow.
不能耐受常规BTO的患者需要行高流量的EC-IC搭桥。	Patients who fail conventional BTO require high-flow EC-IC bypass.
常规球囊闭塞试验阴性但逆流动脉压低、灌注不足或血压降低后出现恶化的患者可以从高/低流量搭桥手术中获益。	Patients who pass conventional BTO but demonstrate low back-pressures, perfusion deficits, or deteriorate with hypotensive challenge also benefit from high or low flow bypass procedures.
新的影像学工具-量化MRA对评估脑血流量也有相当大的帮助。	Newer methods for assessing cerebral blood flow via quantitative magnetic resonance (MR) angiography have also shown considerable promise.
Charbel及其同事研究了16例患者发现量化MRA提示同侧MCA或ACA血流量减少超过20%者都无法耐受BTO。	In a study of 16 patients by Charbel and colleagues, a greater than 20% decrease in blood flow through the ipsilateral MCA or ACA resulted in a 100% correlation with failure of BTO.
搭桥手术的学习曲线比较陡峭，需要术者熟识相关解剖学知识并具备扎实的显微神经血管外科技术。	Bypass procedures involved steep learning curves and require expertise in neurovascular microsurgery and relevant operative anatomy.
图2：尸头标本演示使用静脉进行ECA/ICA-M2高流量搭桥。	Figure 2: Photographs of cadaveric specimens demonstrate a high-flow venous bypass (ECA/ICA–M2).
颧弓上钻一沟槽容纳桥血管无缠结地通过；	The zygomatic arch is drilled to provide a conduit for the graft without its kinking.
在豆纹动脉远端选取一段分支最少的M2作为受血动脉临时阻断，采用端-侧吻合的方式以8-0或9-0的尼龙线间断缝合远端吻合口（右上图的箭头）；	The M2 branch with the least number of side branches is temporarily trapped distal to the lenticulostriate perforating arteries. The distal anastomosis requires end-to-side technique using interrupted 8-0 or 9-0 nylon sutures (right upper photo-arrow).
随后完全阻断颈部的ICA或ECA，使用7-0尼龙线，桥血管近端要么端-侧吻合至ICA，要么端-端吻合至ECA。（图片由AL Rhoton,Jr授权）	After completion of the intracranial anastomosis, the cervical ECA or ICA is occluded proximally and distally and the proximal end of the graft is anastomosed to the ICA in an end-to-side fashion or to the ECA in an end-to-end configuration using 7-0 nylon sutures (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
患者的体位取决于动脉瘤的位置、供血和受血动脉之间的关系。	Patient positioning during high-flow revascularization depends on the underlying location of the aneurysm and the relationship of the donor and recipient vessels.
不能过度扭转患者的颈部以免椎动脉受压于颅颈交接区。	Care should be taken not to turn the patient’s neck excessively because this maneuver can potentially compress the vertebral arteries at the craniocervical junction.
计划采用侧卧位时应在摆放体位前置入股动脉插管，仰卧位和侧卧位时均可获取桡动脉。	If the lateral position is planned, a femoral artery sheath should be placed before turning the patient. The radial artery can be harvested with the patient in either in the supine or lateral position.
图3：依据供血、受血动脉的位置和计划分离桥血管的部位来调整患者的体位。	Figure 3: Patient positioning is tailored according to the location of the donor and recipient vessels, as well as the site designated for harvesting the graft.
沿胸锁乳突肌前缘做一道5cm的切口暴露颈部的ICA和ECA。	A 5-cm incision is made along the anterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle to expose the internal and external carotid arteries in the neck.
同时进行颈部解剖、开颅和取桥血管可以加快手术进程。	The interposition graft harvest, neck dissection, and craniotomy can be performed concurrently to advance operative efficiency.
图4：个人偏好使用桡动脉。	Figure 4: I prefer the radial artery interposition graft for most high-flow revascularization procedures.
仔细分离、结扎该动脉的小分支，避免损伤主干。	Careful isolation and ligation of the small branches arising from this artery is imperative during its atraumatic harvest.
获取一段合适长度的桥血管并实现无张力吻合至关重要。	The key component of this step is securing a graft of appropriate length to guarantee a tension-free anastomosis.
该步骤由外周血管外科医师完成，个中细节这里不再详细论述。	I ask my peripheral vascular surgery colleagues to perform this part of the operation. Therefore, the details of the technique are not elaborated upon.
取得桥血管后，肝素盐水灌洗、膨胀管腔（压力扩张技术）。	Pressurized heparinized saline is used to dilate the graft (the pressure distention technique) after its extraction.
颈部暴露	Cervical Exposure
常规备好患者的颈部以便控制近端和备行EC-IC搭桥。	The patient’s neck should always be prepped in preparation for an EC-IC bypass, securing proximal control.
若搭桥手术涉及颅外的颈动脉，以颈总动脉分叉水平为中心沿胸锁乳突肌前缘做一5cm切口，切开皮肤和颈阔肌。	If the bypass procedure involves the extracranial carotid arteries, a 5-cm longitudinal incision should be made through the skin and platysma, along the anterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle centered at the level of the carotid bifurcation.
随后游离胸锁乳突肌并牵向外侧，在颈内静脉内侧暴露颈动脉鞘。	The sternocleidomastoid muscle is then dissected free and retracted laterally to expose the carotid sheath, just medial to the jugular vein.
在头侧经常可见二腹肌后腹和舌下神经跨越ICA，应妥善保护。	The posterior belly of the digastric muscle and hypoglossal nerve are often encountered rostrally crossing the ICA and should be preserved.
面总静脉位于下端，可被结扎剪断增加CCA、ICA和ECA的显露。	The common facial vein may be encountered caudally and can be ligated and divided to aid in exposure of the CCA, ICA, and ECA.
使用控制带分别套住这些动脉，每一根血管都应游离出距颈总动脉分叉处4cm的长度以便放置阻断夹、吻合时有足够的操作空间。	Each vessel should be isolated with vessel loops and exposed up to 4 cm of its length from the carotid bifurcation to permit sufficient space for anastomosis and temporary clip application.
推荐使用ECA作为近端的吻合部位，这样可避免临时阻断ICA的需要。	I recommend using the ECA as the site of proximal anastomosis to obviate the need for temporary ICA occlusion.
但如果ECA的解剖走形会造成桥血管扭转，则改用ICA。	However, this maneuver may lead to torsion of the graft based on the location of the ECA; in this situation, the ICA should be used.
《颈动脉内膜剥脱术》一章里将更详细地介绍暴露颈总动脉分叉部的技术要点。	For more technical tenets related to exposing the ICA bifurcation, please refer to the Carotid Endarterectomy chapter.
开颅	Craniotomy
常规翼点入路，根据吻合口部位和目标病变位置做适当调整。	A pterional craniotomy is designed based on the site of anastomosis and the underlying pathology.
开颅范围应足够大，充分暴露受体动脉；也可以通过去骨瓣缓解潜在的脑水肿和占位效应。	The craniotomy should be large enough to expose the recipient vessel and wide enough to relieve possible cerebral edema and mass effect via craniectomy.
扩大骨瓣或联合眶壁截骨术可以增加暴露。	A larger craniotomy or the addition of an orbitotomy may provide extended exposure.
术中常常需要静脉使用2000-3000IU的肝素预防桥血管血栓形成，因此，开颅过程中一定要彻底严密止血。	Careful and immaculate hemostasis must be obtained during the exposure and epidural dissection as 2000-3000 IU of intravenous heparin is often administered intraoperatively to prevent graft thrombosis.
血管吻合	Anastomoses
供端（ECA/ICA）、受端（M2）都准备好后就可以开始吻合血管了。	After the exposure of the donor (ECA/ICA) and recipient (M2) vessels has been completed, anastomosis may commence.
广泛开放外侧裂，松解额下的蛛网膜并将额叶抬离颅底。	The Sylvian fissure is widely split and the fontal lobe is untethered from its subfrontal arachnoid adhesions so that it can be mobilized away from the skull base.
强烈推荐首先吻合颅内端，此时桥血管很松弛容易翻转，操作更方便。	I strongly recommend the execution of the intracranial anastomosis first to take advantage of the slack in the graft and the ability to rotate the graft during the anastomosis.
而如果先吻合颅外端血管，吻合颅内端时操作空间会受限，也容易形成血栓，难度更大。	The intracranial anastomosis is often more technically difficult because of the availability of the limited surgical corridor and carries the higher risk of thrombosis compared with its extracranial counterpart.
图5：术区彻底止血。	Figure 5: Immaculate hemostasis should be ensured within the surgical field.
在受血动脉下方垫入一块带颜色的对照物（橡胶垫片）映衬透明的血管管壁，同时保护深面的脑组织。	A colored background material (rubber dam) is placed under the recipient artery to provide contrast for visualization of the transparent arterial walls and to protect the underlying brain parenchyma.
术中需要肝素盐水不断冲洗术区，在橡胶垫片下方留置一根具有持续吸引作用的引流管可以使吻合部位保持干燥。	A drain under continuous suction and under the rubber dam may be used to keep the anastomotic site dry during liberal heparinized saline irrigation at the time of microsurgery.
随后，无菌油墨笔标记动脉管壁切开的位置。	Next, I mark the arteriotomy site using a sterile ink pen.
修整桥血管开口宽的一端并去除外膜，准备吻合。	The wide end of the graft is cleaned and stripped of its adventitia and then brought into the field.
如果是大隐静脉，将断端宽的这侧吻合至受血动脉，可避免损伤静脉瓣膜，同时保持管腔内的血流方向。	If saphenous vein is used, the wide end of the graft should be anastomosed with the recipient vessel to avoid valvulotomy and preserve the natural direction of blood flow within the interposition graft.
临时阻断受血动脉（一般是M2）前，静脉使用2000-3000U的肝素。	Prior to temporary occlusion (trapping) of the recipient artery (typically M2,) 2000-3000U of heparin is administered intravenously.
FiO2上调至100%，稍微升高血压促进侧支循环，并使用依托咪酯诱导爆发-抑制波形。	Burst suppression is achieved via infusion of etomidate, FiO2 is increased to 100%, and blood pressure is slightly elevated to augment collateral perfusion.
尽量将临时阻断的时间控制在30-40min以下，但对于ECA-PCA这类技术难度大的搭桥，阻断时长往往会超过。	My goal is to keep temporary occlusion time under 30 to 40 minutes; however, this may be unachievable in more technically challenging cases, such as for the ECA-to-PCA anastomosis.
图6：选取靠近MCA分叉部又没有分支的M2接受搭桥，小阻断夹中断其血流，然后，显微刀切开管壁并用显微剪沿标记线延长切口。	Figure 6: The recipient artery (M2) is trapped using small temporary clips; perforator-free zones, slightly distal to the sites of bifurcation, are used for obvious reasons. Next, the recipient vessel is arteriotomized with a micro-knife and the arteriotomy is lengthened using microscissors along the ink line.
受血动脉造口的长度约为其管径的2-3倍。	The arteriotomy length should be approximately 2-3 times the diameter of the recipient vessel.
“鱼嘴样”扩大桥血管的远心端开口。	The distal end of the graft’s lumen is expanded by “fish-mouthing” its opening.
采用间断缝合方式，以8-0或9-0的尼龙线吻合M2或P2端，以7-0的尼龙线吻合近端ICA。	I use interrupted 8-0 or 9-0 nylon sutures for M2 or P2 anastomoses and 7-0 nylon sutures for proximal ICA anastomosis.
先在造口两极各缝合一针以对位、固定桥血管。	Two sutures are first placed through either corners of the arteriotomy (toe and heel) to approximate and anchor the graft.
余下的漏口可以间断或连续缝合。	Next, the remainder of the anastomosis can be performed using a running or interrupted suturing technique.
结扎最后一针之前，再次用肝素盐水冲洗管腔。	Prior to completion of the anastomosis closure, the lumens of the M2 and graft are flushed with heparinized saline.
吻合完成后，在桥血管远离吻合口的部位放置一枚临时阻断夹，移除受血动脉的夹子使血流再通，以免阻断时间延长。	A temporary clip is placed on the graft distal to the anastomosis and flow is re-established through the recipient vessel to avoid prolonged occlusion time.
吻合部位的出血/渗血可用止血纱和明胶海绵控制。	Bleeding/oozing at the anastomosis is controlled using pieces of Surgicel and Gelfoam.
图7：分别先在造口两极各穿入一针连续缝线以对位、固定桥血管（上图）。	Figure 7: The first running suture anchors the graft to one end of the arteriotomy (heel) while a second suture anchors the graft to the other end of the arteriotomy (toe)(top illustration).
将桥血管翻向一侧便于完成侧壁的吻合。	The graft is flipped side to side to allow for completion of anastomosis on both walls.
打结之前抽紧每根缝线（下图）。	The loops of the sutures are then tightened before their final knot (bottom photo).
接下来是将桥血管从颧弓根表面的皮下隧道拉向颈部的术区。	Next, the graft is tunneled over the root of the zygoma toward the cervical incision.
将一把止血钳从颞肌附着处插入，朝下颌角方向，穿过咬肌和腮腺筋膜最终到达颈部切口的上端。	During this step, I tunnel a hemostatic clamp through the insertion site of the temporalis muscle toward the mandibular angle, piercing through the masseter and parotid fascia, reaching the superior end of the cervical incision.
钳子夹住一根儿童胸腔闭式引流管之后回退，这样引流管便可连接头颈部切口并能为桥血管提供稳固而平滑的通道。	A pediatric chest tube is then introduced and carried rostrally by the hemostatic clamp and serves as a rigid yet smooth tunnel for passage of the graft.
若计划将桥血管留置于耳前，为了避免盘曲扭结或管腔狭窄，可能需要在颧弓上磨一条沟槽。	The zygomatic arch may need to be drilled down to avoid kinking, twisting, or obstruction of the lumen of the graft and compromise of its flow. This drilling fashions a conduit for the graft when it is placed in the preauricular position.
图8：桥血管借助儿童胸腔闭式引流管通向颈部。	Figure 8: The graft is tunneled from the cranial operative field into the cervical field using a pediatric chest tube.
在此之前，先于颧弓磨一条骨槽防止血管受卡压。	A notch is drilled in the zygoma before tunneling to prevent obstruction of the graft’s lumen.
引流管上剪开个小裂口以允许桥血管固定于管腔内，同时，后续引导血管通过时使用该裂口定位引流管的方向和预防桥血管出现扭结。	A slit is cut in the chest tube to allow the graft to be placed directly inside the tube; this landmark also maintains and confirms the alignment of the tube during its passage and prevents the graft from twisting.
随后引流管从颈部退出，并与桥血管脱离。	The tube is pulled through from the cervical field and the graft is removed from the tube.
与远端吻合口一样，吻合近端前同法置入橡胶垫片和引流管。	The proximal anastomotic site is also prepared in a similar fashion with a colored background and drain.
修剪桥血管长度，不仅要避免过短使吻合存在张力，也要防止过长使血管扭曲打折造成血流受阻。	The interposition graft should be resized sharply, so that it is not under undue tension. Moreover, a redundant graft is prone to twisting, buckling, and resultant disruption of its flow after anastomosis.
临时夹阻断分叉处的ECA，将其远端结扎切断，再行端-端吻合。	The ECA at the level of the bifurcation is first trapped using temporary clips, the distal end tied off, and then transected. Anastomosis to the ECA is performed in an end-to-end manner.
图9：如图示将桥血管吻合于CCA或ICA，如果这样可以减少血管扭转的话。	Figure 9: The cervical anastomosis is completed onto the CCA or ICA if the graft will be under less torsion in this alignment and configuration.
若颈动脉分叉部太高难以企及，可以CCA为供血血管。	The CCA may also be used as the donor vessel in patients with relatively inaccessible “high-riding” bifurcations.
左上图演示使用血管打孔器在CCA侧壁创造一个卵圆形的开口，	The left upper image demonstrates the use of a vascular punch to create the oval opening in the sidewall of the CCA.
右上图中清晰可见动脉造口和控制带的位置。	The location of the oval opening and vascular loops is evident (right upper image).
下图为吻合完成后所见。	The anastomosis is complete (lower images).
无菌油墨笔标记供血动脉的造口处，“鱼嘴样”扩大桥血管断端增加吻合口面积，	The arteriotomy site on the donor vessel is marked with an ink pen and the graft is prepared for anastomosis by “fish-mouthing” its end to increase the anastomotic surface area.
随后使用7-0的尼龙线进行端-端吻合。	An end-to-end anastomosis is performed using 7-0 nylon sutures.
结扎最后一针之前，在吻合口远端的桥血管放置一枚临时阻断夹并用肝素盐水充分灌洗管腔。	Prior to closing the last knot, a temporary clip is placed on the graft just distal to the anastomosis and the lumen is copiously irrigated with heparinized saline.
通过移除ECA的阻断夹恢复近端ECA血流来冲刷出血栓和其他碎渣。	Flow is re-established in the proximal ECA by removing the temporary clip on the ECA to allow any arterial emboli and debris to be washed out.
然后再次阻断ECA，打紧最后一针的线结。	The ECA is then reclamped and the last knot is laid down.
移除桥血管阻断夹的顺序是先远端后近端。	The distal temporary clip on the graft is removed first followed by the proximal one.
出血或渗血部位用止血纱或明胶海绵轻轻压塞，	The bleeding points or oozing are treated with application of Surgicel or Gelfoam and gentle tamponade.
出血汹涌者可能需要缝合止血。	In cases of vigorous bleeding, additional sutures may be applied.
术后颈部留置引流管预防血肿形成。	A suction drain should be placed in the patient’s neck during closure to prevent a postoperative hematoma.
搭桥血流的术中评估	Intraoperative Assessment of Flow
血管吻合全部完成后，很重要的一个环节就是明确搭桥是否通畅。	The most important step after anastomosis is confirmation of bypass patency.
通过观察和触摸初步判断桥血管有无血流通过。	Blood flow through the graft may be initially assessed through visual and tactile inspection for pulsatility.
图10：微型超声多普勒探测血流（上图）。	Figure 10: Microdoppler ultrasonography is used to assess flow in the vessels (top image).
创伤小和实施迅速的荧光或吲哚菁绿（ICG）造影是术中评价搭桥通畅性的可靠手段（下图）。	Fluorescein or indocyanine green (ICG) angiography is more reliable as a minimally invasive and rapid technique to evaluate bypass flow intraoperatively (bottom image).
荧光血管造影简单易行，能够发现血流不足、狭窄或闭塞的部位。	Fluorescence angiography is easy to perform and can help identify areas of poor flow, stenosis, or occlusion.
另外一种无创工具-Charbel微型血流探测器（Transonic Systems, Ithaca, NY）可以在术中实时量化桥血管的血流量，而常规的微型超声多普勒仅能判断是否有血流通过。	The Charbel Micro-flowprobe (Transonic Systems, Ithaca, NY) is another minimally invasive tool that can quantitatively assess real-time blood flow through the graft intraoperatively. In contrast, microdoppler ultrasonography provides only a qualitative assessment.
搭桥失败的术中应对策略	Strategies for Facing Intraoperative Graft Failure
如果术中荧光造影提示桥血管闭塞，术者应该仔细检查双侧吻合口和桥血管全程。	If the graft is occluded on intraoperative fluorescence angiography, both anastomoses sites and the tunneling of the graft should be inspected.
如果患者能耐受球囊阻塞试验，那么原因可能是对侧代偿过来的血流量大于桥血管所提供的，这种情况并不需要血管重建。	If the patient has passed the BTO, it is possible that the contralateral competitive flow is overwhelming the flow in the interposition graft and revascularization is not needed.
如果术中电生理监测没有检测到神经功能下降的迹象而且检查后证实不存在任何技术失误，那么最好将桥血管保留在原位。	If neuromonitoring does not detect any impending neurologic decline and careful inspection does not demonstrate any technical error, it may be best to leave the graft in place.
如果搭桥不通畅伴有体感诱发电位或者运动诱发电位改变，应该依次打开远端（颅内）和近端（颈部）吻合口，用肝素盐水冲洗所有部位，随后重新吻合。	If changes in somatosensory or motor evoked potentials are detected and the graft is not functional, I reopen the distal (intracranial) anastomosis site followed by the proximal (extracranial) anastomosis site and irrigate all sites with heparinized saline solution. Both anastomoses are then reconstructed.
若是这样做了之后，不存在张力和扭转的桥血管仍然不通，应该再次评估搭桥手术的安全性，并考虑是否放弃血管重建直接缝合受血动脉的切口。	Despite a second effort, if the interposition graft is not viable, not under tension or twisted, I reassess the safety of performing the bypass and consider closure of the intracranial arteriotomy without revascularization.
术毕患者入ICU监护。术后第1天每小时触摸桥血管的搏动并用微型超声多普勒探测，第2天和第3天时分别改为每4小时和8小时一次。	Evaluation in the intensive care unit includes hourly palpation and microdoppler ultrasonographic monitoring of the graft during the first postoperative day. This monitoring is subsequently spaced out to every 4 and 8 hours by the second and third postoperative days, respectively.
术后24小时行常规CT检查，但如果怀疑存在血流不畅应即刻行CT或介入血管造影。	Any concern regarding graft patency necessitates an immediate CT or catheter angiogram; otherwise a regular CT scan is obtained 24 hours after surgery.
图11：图1所示患者的术后血管造影证实动脉瘤已被孤立不显影，同时桥血管血流通畅。	Figure 11: The postoperative angiogram images for the patient in Figure 1 demonstrate a patent interposition graft and exclusion of the aneurysm.
术后48小时内应避免高血压以防出现高灌注性并发症；若使用桡动脉进行搭桥，应在术后24小时内评估手部的血供；术后前3天皮下注射肝素钠（5000U,q8h），之后患者终身服用阿司匹林（325mg，qd）；术后3个月和1年时复查CTA，随后依据所处理病变的需要每2-5年复查1次。	During the first 48 hours after surgery, systemic hypertension is avoided to prevent hyperperfusion complications. In the case of radial artery grafts, perfusion of the hand is also assessed for the first 24 hours after the operation. Patients remain on subcutaneous heparin (5000 U every 8 hours) for the first 3 days and aspirin (325 mg daily) indefinitely. Follow-up CT angiogram imaging is again performed on follow-up at 3 months, 1 year, and every 2-5 years thereafter based on the underlying vascular pathology.
搭桥的通畅率	Bypass Patency
随着近期EC-IC搭桥技术的进展，其并发症发生率和死亡率已经分别显著降至低于7%和2%，而且技术娴熟的术者可以将通畅率由66%提升至95%。	Recent advancements in EC-IC bypass techniques have significantly reduced morbidity and mortality rates to less than 7% and 2%, respectively, and have also increased graft patency rates from 66% to up to 95% in experienced hands.
若是后循环的搭桥，以上数据会稍微差一些。	For posterior circulation anastomosis, these rates are slightly lower.
血栓形成、血流滞缓和桥血管管壁的内皮脱落都会降低通畅率，所以术中应极力避免机械性损伤。	Thrombosis, sluggish flow, and intimal desquamation on the graft wall have been associated with lower patency rates; therefore, care must be taken to avoid mechanical trauma during surgery.
绝大部分的搭桥失败发生在术后1周内，这可能与手术技巧问题和凝血障碍有关；	Most graft failures occur within the first week after surgery and are likely related to surgical technique or coagulopathy.
超过1周仍通畅者在术后6个月复查时几乎全部依然保持畅通。	Almost all the grafts that are patent one week after surgery remain so at the 6-month follow-up evaluation.
新的搭桥技术	New Anastomosis Technique
和低流量搭桥比较，由于高流量搭桥需要临时阻断的颅内血管管径更粗、更靠近端，因此并发缺血事件的风险更高。	When compared with its low-flow counterpart, the high-flow EC-IC bypass has been correlated with higher risks of ischemic complications because larger and more proximal intracranial arteries are temporarily occluded during the performance of the anastomosis.
有鉴于此，Tulleken及其同事介绍了一种新的吻合技术，以期降低缺血风险。	To avoid cerebral ischemia during temporary occlusion, Tulleken and colleagues have described a novel method of anastomosis that can potentially decrease this risk.
这种技术也被称作“准分子激光辅助的无阻断式吻合（excimer laser-assisted nonocclusive anastomosis，ELANA）”，即使用准分子激光在受血动脉管壁上造口。	Their technique uses an excimer laser beam to create an opening in the recipient vessel wall and thereby is called excimer laser-assisted nonocclusive anastomosis (ELANA).
完成颅内吻合后，无需阻断便可在颈部桥接血管。	After the intracranial anastomosis has been performed, the cervical recipient is grafted without a need for temporary occlusion.
ELANA技术可以促进在更粗和更近端的血管完成搭桥而不增加手术风险。	The ELANA technique facilitates bypasses connected to larger and more proximal arteries with potentially no increased risk.
凸面脑膜瘤	Convexity Meningioma
图1.Walter Dandy演示轴外肿瘤切除以及深部供血动脉夹闭（Dandy WE. The Brain.W.F. PriorCompany.Hagerstown,Maryland,1966）。	Figure 1: Walter Dandy demonstrates resection of an extra-axial tumor and specifically the clipping of a deep feeding artery (Dandy WE. The Brain. W.F. Prior Company. Hagerstown, Maryland, 1966.)
凸面脑膜瘤可起源于所有脑叶表面的软脑膜，约占颅内脑膜瘤的15-20%。	Convexity meningiomas develop from the leptomeninges of the cerebral convexities over all lobes of the brain and represent 15-20% of intracranial meningiomas.
由于其位置较表浅，远离颅底及静脉窦，手术全切概率高。	Due to their accessible location, distance from the skull base and the dural venous sinuses, they offer the greatest potential to achieve their radical gross total resection.
肿瘤切除范围应该包括附着的硬脑膜及异常颅骨，以期尽量减少肿瘤复发机会，特别是年轻患者。	Their excision should encompass a wide dural margin and the involved bone, especially for young patients, to decrease the risk of tumor recurrence.
凸面脑膜瘤是神经外科最早可采用手术治疗的疾病之一。	Similarly, convexity meningiomas were among the earliest accessible surgical targets in our profession.
图2.Cushing教授的一个额叶脑膜瘤导致骨质增生并接受手术的患者。	Figure 2: Images of one of Harvey Cushing’s patients who underwent resection of a left frontal hyperostotic meningioma.
术前X线表现（右上图），术中发现（左下图），术后表现（右下图）(该图由耶鲁大学的Cushing脑肿瘤注册中心授权)。	Note the preoperative X-ray image (right upper image), intraoperative findings as sketched by Cushing (left lower image) and postoperative outcome (right lower image) (Courtesy of the Cushing Brain Tumor Registry at Yale University).
临床表现很大程度上取决于肿瘤位置。	Clinical presentation is largely dependent on tumor location.
部分肿瘤由于远离功能区，可持续生长直至体积巨大才出现高颅压症状。	Tumors situated away from the eloquent cortices may reach a large or giant size before presenting with symptoms of raised intracranial pressure.
凸面脑膜瘤经常由偶然的影像学检查而发现，也可由局部神经功能障碍或受压皮层癫痫活动而发现。	Convexity meningiomas are frequently found incidentally on unrelated imaging studies, but may present with focal neurologic findings or epileptic activity of the underlying cortex.
伴随颅骨骨质增生的肿瘤可出现颜面部外观畸形。	Hyperostotic tumors may present with cosmetic deformity of the skull.
图3.常见脑膜瘤颅内分布情况。	Figure 3: Relative distribution of the most common intracranial meningiomas is illustrated.
增强磁共振（MRI）是脑膜瘤最主要的诊断方法。	Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast enhancement is the main diagnostic study of choice for these tumors.
凸面脑膜瘤的影像学特征与其它脑膜瘤类似：肿瘤均质强化及脑膜尾征。	Their imaging characteristics are similar to other meningiomas: homogeneous enhancement and an enhancing dural tail.
T2/FLAIR序列用于评估压迫脑组织水肿情况，同时亦可呈现肿瘤与软脑膜之间的蛛网膜下界面。	The T2/FLAIR sequences allow evaluation of underlying brain edema and presence of a subarachnoid plane between the tumor and the pia.
大的皮层血管（矢状窦旁的桥静脉或Labbe静脉）及其受累情况应通过CT血管造影（CTA）或MRV等术前检查予以明确。	Large cortical vasculature (large parasagittal veins or vein of Labbe) and their involvement should be studied preoperatively through the use of complementary studies such as a computed tomography (CT) angiogram or MR venogram.
保留这些静脉对获得满意预后至关重要。	Preservation of these veins is fundamental to securing a desirable outcome after meningioma surgery.
CT扫描不仅可以评估肿瘤颅骨侵犯情况，而且可以观察肿瘤钙化情况。	CT scans allow evaluation of bony involvement and may also identify calcification in some tumors.
肿瘤侵犯颅骨的情况在术前准备中必须考虑到。	Bone erosion must be considered during preoperative planning.
颅骨骨质增生提示肿瘤浸润，必须予以切除。	Hyperostosis suggests tumor infiltration and requires resection.
需要与凸面脑膜瘤鉴别的病变主要有血管外皮细胞瘤，原发骨肿瘤，硬脑膜转移瘤及淋巴瘤。	Other lesions mimicing a convexity meningioma include hemangiopericytomas, primary bony tumors, dural-based metastases, and potentially lymphoma.
图4.凸面脑膜瘤的典型影像学表现：肿瘤显著均质强化及脑膜尾征。	Figure 4: Typical imaging presentation of a convexity meningioma: an intensely homogenously enhancing dural-based tumor with dural tails.
肿瘤基底部血管呈星芒放射状生长。	Note the vascular star-burst pattern of the tumor at its base.
病变体积较小、无临床表现的老年患者可定期影像学检查，长期随访；没有临床表现的年轻患者可以暂观察直至发现肿瘤增大；但对于肿瘤体积较大、有临床表现的患者，手术切除是首选治疗方案。	Older patients with small, asymptomatic lesions may be observed with serial imaging. Younger patients’ asymptomatic tumors may be observed until growth is identified, but if the patient has a large or symptomatic lesion, surgical resection is the primary treatment modality.
对于小的残余肿瘤或者复发肿瘤可以采用放射治疗。放射治疗也可以用于高级别脑膜瘤的辅助治疗，帮助不能耐受手术切除的患者减轻痛苦。	Radiosurgery may be used for small residual or recurrent tumors, for adjuvant treatment of higher-grade meningiomas, and for palliation in patients unable to tolerate surgical resection.
对于小的病变，除了规范的神经麻醉及导航（定位）外，不需其它特别注意事项。	Small lesions do not require special consideration beyond standard cranial neuroanesthesia and navigation.
手术开始即刻使用地塞米松、抗癫痫药物及甘露醇，特别是对于存在脑水肿的患者。	Dexamethasone, anticonvulsant medications, and mannitol are administered at the start of the surgery, especially if the patient has underlying brain edema.
侵犯静脉窦的较大病变在手术过程中往往出血较严重，术前血液学检查及术中静脉空气栓塞的监测及预防处理措施必须得到保证。	Large lesions invading the dural sinuses often lead to significant bleeding during surgery and preoperative hematologic studies and precautions for intraoperative venous air embolism detection and management are warranted.
术前血管内栓塞是不必要的，因为开颅后通过经硬膜电凝断开肿瘤与硬脑膜的连接，肿瘤血供便能得到控制。	Preoperative embolization is unnecessary because the tumor’s meningeal vascular supply is addressed readily after craniotomy through transdural coagulation and circumcision of the tumor’s dural attachments.
由于凸面脑膜瘤位置表浅，手术目标应是全切肿瘤及肿瘤基底处的硬膜，如果条件允许的话可沿硬膜基底向外切除1-2cm。	Due to this tumor’s accessibility, every effort should be made to achieve a gross total resection, with consideration of excision of dural margins 1-2 cm beyond the points of attachment/dural tail.
骨瓣上增生的颅骨应磨除。	Hyperostotic bone on the craniotomy flap should be resected.
如果术前检查提示大面积颅骨侵犯，根据颅骨缺损面积，要预制人造骨瓣或钛网，准备行颅骨成形术。	If preoperative studies suggest significant bony involvement, a custom synthetic skull flap or titanium mesh cranioplasty is prepared in advance, depending on the size of the defect.
凸面脑膜瘤切除技巧	RESECTION OF CONVEXITY MENINGIOMAS
开颅的一些细节请参考手术入路章节。	Please refer to the Cranial Approaches volume for details of the craniotomy.
由于肿瘤部位不同，骨窗位置都是不一样的。	Each tumor requires a unique bony exposure based on its location.
利用神经导航可以根据肿瘤位置个体化设计切口，为扩大切除硬膜提供更好的显露。	Neuronavigation allows a tailored incision that provides adequate exposure for wide dural excision.
尽管长的直切口即可提供良好的肿瘤显露，但对于宽基底的凸面脑膜瘤，采用弧形或马蹄形切口通常更合适。	Although a long linear incision may provide adequate exposure, a curvilinear or horseshoe incision is usually more appropriate for wide-based convexity meningiomas.
手术完成后，通常存在较大的脑膜缺损。	At the end of the operation, a large dural defect is often apparent.
所以，在开颅的时候，笔者会常规保留一块大的带蒂骨膜瓣用于硬膜切除后的缺损修补。	Therefore, during the early parts of the operation, I routinely harvest a large piece of pericranium to be used for postresection dural closure.
笔者尽量避免使用人工硬脑膜，这会增加发生感染及无菌性炎症的风险。	I avoid using synthetic dural allografts because they lead to an increased risk of infection and aseptic inflammation.
这种风险在硬脑膜大面积缺损后完全使用人工硬脑膜修补时尤为突出。	These risks are especially heightened when an allograft is used for large dural defects.
图5.额叶脑膜瘤患者头位及头架固定钉常规位置展示。	Figure 5: Typical position of the skull clamp and head for resection of a frontal meningioma are depicted.
注意将单钉放置于耳后。	Note the location of the single pin behind the ear.
这样的固定方式可确保头钉不会对翻起皮瓣造成干扰。	This configuration allows reflection of a large scalp flap without interference from the pins.
小骨窗不利于切除肿瘤附着处的硬脑膜（脑膜尾），增大肿瘤复发风险。	Restricted craniotomies prevent resection of dural tails and lead to an increased chance of future tumor recurrence.
轻度过伸患者颈部可以让出血随重力流下，保持术野清洁。	Extension of the patient’s neck will allow gravity to clear bleeding within the operative field.
图6.上图展示的是左顶叶脑膜瘤侵犯颅骨后病变颅骨的范围。	Figure 6: The upper image demonstrates the extent of hyperostosis associated with a left parietal meningioma.
病变骨质通常血供丰富，开颅过程中出血量较大。	This hyperostotic bone can be highly vascular and lead to voluminous blood loss during bone work.
笔者会直接在肿瘤边界外围连续钻孔，用骨蜡封闭增厚的板障以止血，	I place numerous burr holes immediately next to one another on the periphery of the tumor margins and control the bleeding from the thick cancellous bone through each burr hole using bone wax.
这些连续的骨孔最终形成骨窗完成开颅。	These connecting burr holes ultimately complete the craniotomy.
对于体积较小的肿瘤，如果可能的话可以通过骨孔直接切开硬脑膜（左下图），将病变颅骨、硬脑膜及肿瘤一并切除（右下图）。	The dura may be cut through these holes if feasible (left lower image) and the involved bone, dura, and tumor excised in one piece for smaller tumors (right lower image).
这样的病例中，肿瘤对硬脑膜及颅骨的广泛浸润导致其紧密粘连而难以剥离。	In these cases, extensive infiltration of the dura and bone prevents their separation.
对于体积较大、血供丰富并且侵犯颅骨的肿瘤，颅骨应该用磨钻分块切除。	In large, highly vascular tumors infiltrating the bone, the bone should be removed piecemeal using an air drill.
分块移除骨瓣有助于及时止血。	Stepwise removal of the bone allows for timely hemostasis.
对于大的血供丰富的肿瘤，猛然用力翻起骨瓣会造成致命性出血以及脑皮质损伤。	Inadvertent forceful elevation of the bone flap in large vascular tumors can lead to life-threatening bleeding and cortical injury.
图7.颅骨可能与被肿瘤侵犯并且血供丰富的硬脑膜紧密粘连，翻起骨瓣可能突发硬膜外出血。	Figure 7: The bone may be adherent to the tumor-infiltrated, highly vascular dura, and elevation of the bone flap may lead to torrential epidural bleeding.
利用脑棉轻微压迫减缓出血后逐步电凝止血。	A piece of sponge and gentle pressure can slow bleeding while the dural feeders are coagulated in a stepwise fashion.
然后，在正常皮质上方环形切开硬脑膜，结合神经导航及细致观察区分出正常硬脑膜边界，病变脑膜边缘（脑膜尾）通常会自肿瘤附着点向外延伸。	Next, the dura is incised circumferentially over the normal cortex. Neuronavigation and careful inspection allows identification of the dural margins free of tumor. The dural tails may extend well beyond the margins of the tumor.
将病变脑膜电凝，切断其对脑膜瘤的供血。	The overlying dura is coagulated and cut to devascularize the meningioma.
如果要切除的硬脑膜不在手术视野内，骨窗需要扩大。	If clear dural margins are not visible, the craniotomy should be extended.
肿瘤与大脑皮层之间的皮层静脉应予以保留。	The transdural veins should be preserved.
硬膜内操作步骤	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
在硬膜内操作前，硬膜外必须仔细止血 。	Careful epidural hemostasis is necessary before proceeding with intradural surgery.
图8.保留肿瘤表面被侵犯的硬脑膜有助于术中牵拉肿瘤。	Figure 8: The involved dura is left attached to the tumor to assist with tumor retraction.
仔细辨别肿瘤周边的蛛网膜界面并予锐性分离（上图）。	The subarachnoid planes are identified and opened sharply at the periphery of the tumor (upper image).
仔细操作以防软脑膜受损，特别是位于功能区周边的脑膜。	Care is taken to avoid pial violation, especially around the functional cortices.
瘤腔内所有血管都要仔细辨别，注意保护好过路血管。	All vessels within the extracapsular plane should be carefully inspected and en passage vessels protected.
血管保护对于靠中线后部的脑膜瘤尤为重要，较大的皮层静脉或矢状窦旁桥静脉受损将导致静脉性梗塞及术后严重脑水肿。	This is especially important for more posterior meningiomas because sacrifice of the larger convexity/parasagittal veins may result in disabling venous infarction and postoperative malignant edema.
左顶叶脑膜瘤显露（下图，影像学检查见图4）。	A left parietal meningioma is exposed (lower image-See figure 4 for more details).
术前脑水肿意味着肿瘤侵犯软脑膜。	Preoperative edema indicates pial violation by the tumor.
肿瘤切除过程中注意保护脑皮质，避免过度使用双极电凝。	Intraoperative dissection should carefully preserve the subpial contents and aggressive bipolar coagulation should be avoided.
将肿瘤内部减压，就可以获得空间，通过牵拉瘤体（而非脑组织）来显露正确的分离界面。	The tumor may be debulked so that the tumor rather than the brain is retracted to advance the dissection planes.
如果骨窗边缘脑组织疝出，需要及时采取降颅压措施，并尽快将肿瘤行内减压，减轻占位效应。	If excessive brain tension is present causing excessive cerebral herniation along the craniotomy edges, medical management for increased intracranial pressure should be instituted and the tumor expeditiously debulked and removed to relieve its mass effect.
图9.利用显微操作技术分辨脑皮质与瘤体的界面。	Figure 9: The plane between the cortex and the meningioma is identified using microsurgical techniques.
脑皮质及正常脑膜采用湿脑棉保护。	The pial banks and cortical walls are protected with moist cottonoid patties.
双极电凝灼烧肿瘤包膜使其收缩远离脑组织。	The tumor capsule is cauterized using bipolar electrocautery to shrink and mobilize it away from the brain.
如果明确肿瘤已经侵犯软脑膜，就可以利用湿脑棉将肿瘤推离脑组织（插图）。	If pial invasion is evident, moist cottonoid patties are used to “roll” the tumor away from the brain (inset image).
这种方法可有效的避免因吸引器带来的皮质损伤。	This maneuver effectively protects the subpial structures from suction injury.
体积较大、肿瘤主体位置较深的肿瘤可采用瘤内切除，待周边肿瘤包膜回缩至瘤腔后切除，这种方法可避免对脑组织的过度牵拉。	Larger tumors or those with a dominant deep tumor nodule should be internally enucleated to allow the tumor capsule to be collapsed into the resection cavity; this method avoids excessive brain retraction or manipulation. As the tumor is decompressed, the capsule is reflected away from the surrounding brain tissue.
这种方法使笔者能在同一解剖平面的较浅位置预测肿瘤切除程度。	This maneuver enables me to predict the extent of tumor removal possible at the lower depth of the same dissection plane.
图10.肿瘤周边分离完成后，将瘤体推离脑皮质以备显微分离肿瘤基底部。	Figure 10: Once a superficial circumferential dissection is complete, the tumor is rolled away from the cortex to allow microdissection at the floor of the tumor bed.
将长条形脑棉置入瘤腔深部（上图），形成脑组织与肿瘤的分界面。	Long cottonoid patties are rolled into the depth of the resection cavity to create and preserve the tumor-brain interface (upper image).
将瘤周游离，直至瘤体随着被压迫脑组织的回弹，从瘤腔完全暴露（下图）。	The tumor is circumferentially dissected free until it delivers itself from the cavity as the underlying brain re-expands (lower image).
图11.一旦肿瘤周边完全游离，即可以整块切除。	Figure 11: Once the tumor is circumferentially dissected, it may removed en bloc.
仔细检查瘤腔并止血。	The tumor bed is inspected.
合理使用双极电凝并辅以温盐水冲洗以获得满意的止血效果。	Warm irrigation with judicious use of bipolar electrocautery is used to obtain hemostasis.
小的静脉渗血可以采用凝血酶浸润的脑棉压迫止血。	Slow venous ooze from the brain can be controlled with gentle tamponade and thrombin soaked cottonoid patties.
大的肿瘤可能会有分叶，仔细检查确保闭合的瘤腔内没有瘤体残余。	Larger tumors may have lobules; careful inspection ensures that no tumor hides within the folds of the resection bed.
硬膜边缘也要仔细检查，必要时可向外切除1-2cm。	The dural edges are further inspected and, if needed, are resected 1-2 cm beyond the dural attachments of the tumor.
图12.硬膜缺损采用事先准备好的自体骨膜瓣修补。	Figure 12: The dural defect is repaired using the previously prepared pericranial autograft.
骨窗周边硬膜悬吊能够减少硬膜外死腔形成，从而减少硬膜外积液发生。	Epidural tack-up sutures should be used to constrain the epidural space and decrease postoperative epidural collections.
仔细检查骨瓣，磨除增生的骨质。	The bone flap is inspected for any hyperostosis that should be excised.
最后，颅骨缺损采用预制的合成骨瓣或钛网修补。	Finally, the bone flap is replaced and any large bony defect is covered with a prefabricated custom flap or titanium mesh.
患者术后转入ICU通宵密切观察，予评估神经功能、镇痛及控制血压。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit overnight for frequent neurologic evaluations and pain and blood pressure control.
术后常规复查CT。	A postoperative CT scan is obtained.
术后激素缓慢减量直至停用。	Steroids are weaned slowly postoperatively.
伴有严重脑水肿的肿瘤切除术后可能会出现严重脑肿胀，这样的患者应延长术后激素使用时间。	Tumors with a large amount of underlying cerebral edema may lead to malignant postoperative cerebral swelling; patients with such tumors should be maintained on steroids for a longer postoperative period.
围手术期预防性使用抗癫痫药，如果没有癫痫发作，术后一周停用。	Prophylactic anticonvulsants are administered perioperatively, but stopped one week after surgery if the patient has not suffered from a seizure.
脑膜瘤患者术后深静脉血栓发生风险偏高，应该采取一些预防措施，包括早期下床活动等。	Patients with meningiomas have an increased risk of postoperative deep vein thrombosis. These patients should be treated with aggressive preventive measures including early mobilization.
· 术前应行CT检查评估颅骨侵犯范围。	A preoperative CT scan evaluates the extent of bony involvement.
应把病变骨质切除作为一个重要的手术目标。	Resection of the affected bone is an important goal of surgery.
骨窗应为切除病变硬脑膜留出余地。	In addition, a wide craniotomy should allow generous removal of the affected dura.
· 贴覆于肿瘤表面的皮层过路动静脉应该被保留。	Cortical arteries and veins that are draped over the tumor capsule should be inspected and preserved if they are not terminal tumor vessels.
应避免损伤软脑膜，肿瘤切除应该始终沿着肿瘤与软脑膜之间的蛛网膜界面进行。	Pial violation should be avoided and dissection should be maintained along the extrapial subarachnoid planes.
· 位于额颞叶外侧面、体积较大的脑膜瘤在深部可能会与大脑中动脉（MCA）粘连。	Large lateral frontotemporal meningiomas may adhere to the middle cerebral artery (MCA) branches at their depth.
牵拉这样的肿瘤及锐性离断MCA分支时要仔细。	These tumors should be carefully mobilized and MCA branches sharply dissected.
大脑镰旁脑膜瘤	Parafalcine Meningioma
图1. Cushing和他的同事（Dr.Gaston Decoppet）在讨论一位颅内肿瘤复发患者的病情。	Figure 1: Cushing and a colleague (Dr. Gaston Decoppet) discuss the case of a patient with recurrent brain tumor.
镰旁脑膜瘤起源于大脑镰，约占颅内脑膜瘤的8.5%。与矢状窦旁脑膜瘤不同的是，镰旁脑膜瘤可完全被脑皮质覆盖，可突破大脑镰并常常呈双侧生长。与矢状窦旁脑膜瘤类似的是二者均最多见于上矢状窦中1/3（冠状缝与人字缝之间）。	Parafalcine menigiomas originate from the falx, but unlike parasagittal meningiomas, they are completely covered by the cortex. They may grow through the falx and are often bilateral. Like their parasagittal counterparts, they are most commonly found around the middle third of the superior sagittal sinus, between the coronal and lambdoid sutures. They comprise 8.5% of intracranial meningiomas.
和矢状窦旁脑膜瘤类似，镰旁脑膜瘤的临床表现主要取决于其沿大脑镰生长的部位。	Similar to their parasagittal counterparts, the clinical presentation of a parafalcine meningioma depends on its location along the falx.
中央沟附近的肿瘤可引起癫痫发作或对侧肢体感觉及运动障碍。	Tumors near the central sulcus may cause sensory and motor seizures or contralateral hemiparesis/hemianesthesia.
如果肿瘤累及优势半球辅助运动区（SMA）可引起语言障碍。	Speech dysfunction may also occur if the tumor is related to the dominant supplementary motor area.
大脑镰前1/3肿瘤体积可以长到很大并引起认知障碍、头痛、视物模糊或视乳头水肿。	Accordingly, the tumors along the anterior third of the falx can reach a large size and may cause cognitive dysfunction, headaches, and blurred vision/papilledema.
大脑镰后1/3肿瘤可引起视觉障碍，如同向偏盲或者幻觉。	Those at the posterior third may cause visual disturbances such as homonymous hemianopsia or hallucinations.
镰旁脑膜瘤偶尔也会引起脑内、硬膜下或蛛网膜下出血。	Occasionally, a falcine meningioma may be the source of intracerebral, subdural, or subarachnoid hemorrhage.
罕见情况下肿瘤可仅引起单一的对侧下肢无力。	There is also the rare circumstance when the tumor can only cause isolated contralateral lower extremity weakness.
注意不要与脊髓神经根受压引起的功能障碍相混淆。	This presentation should not be confused with radiculopathy because of nerve root compression.
上运动神经元体征（可能很细微）以及肌无力分布范围（与个别神经根受压引起的肌群受累无关）可用于两者的临床鉴别。	Upper tract signs (can be subtle) and distribution of the weakness (not respecting muscle groups for individual roots) help the clinician differentiate between these scenarios.
磁共振（MRI）可见双侧半球间以大脑镰为基底伴脑膜尾征的轴外肿瘤。	Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reveals an extra-axial interhemispheric tumor that has a dural tail and is based on the falx.
T2加权像可用于评估大脑前动脉末端及其分支的分布。	T2-weighted MR images estimate the location of the distal anterior cerebral arteries and their branches.
脑实质水肿意味着软脑膜受侵犯，与术后神经功能障碍相关。	Parenchymal edema signifies pial invasion and correlates with neurologic deterioration after surgery.
MR或CT静脉造影可用于评估上矢状窦受侵犯或闭塞程度以及明确大的矢状窦旁桥静脉及其属支位置。	Magnetic resonance or computed tomography venogram assesses the degree of superior sagittal sinus invasion or occlusion and estimates the location of large midline parasagittal bridging veins or their collaterals.
这些静脉的位置可用于指导手术入路，以确保在大脑半球间获得足够的手术空间抵达肿瘤。	The locations of these veins guide dissection, ensuring an adequate interhemispheric corridor to reach the tumor.
体积较大的肿瘤经常包绕胼周动脉及胼缘动脉，术前应行CTA鉴别这些被包绕或推移的重要血管。	Large tumors often encase the callosomarginal and pericallosal arteries. A preoperative CT angiogram identifies displacement or encasement of these vital vessels.
图2.不同体积的镰旁脑膜瘤。	Figure 2: Parafalcine meningiomas are located on the falx and can occur in a range of sizes.
CTA显示胼周动脉及胼缘动脉被体积巨大的肿瘤包绕。	A CT angiogram demonstrates encasement of the pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries by a very large tumor.
症状进行性加重的患者应行手术治疗。	Patients with progressive symptoms are reasonable candidates for surgery.
肿瘤体积较小的，无症状的患者可定期影像学检查，随访。	Small asymptomatic tumors can undergo surveillance imaging.
重要桥静脉及静脉窦遭部分侵犯的肿瘤可予次全切除，残余瘤体予放射治疗。	Tumors that partially obstruct critical bridging veins or the sinus may be subtotally removed and the growing tumor remnants treated with radiosurgery.
术前腰大池引流有助于松弛脑组织，最大程度减少术中对脑组织的牵拉（尤其对于体积较大的肿瘤）。	A lumbar drain affords brain relaxation that minimizes brain retraction (especially in the case of large tumors).
在纵裂入路显露镰旁脑膜瘤的过程中不进入充满脑脊液的脑池，因而腰大池引流显得尤为重要。	This is especially important because cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cavities are not entered during interhemispheric dissection to access the parafalcine tumor.
选择性脑皮质切除行内减压更是不必要的。	Elective cortical resection should not be necessary.
对于造成明显占位效应和中线移位的巨大脑膜瘤，笔者从未遇到过因术中腰大池引流而导致小脑幕切迹疝的情况。	I have not encountered any risk of transtentorial herniation with prudent intraoperative lumbar drainage for giant meningiomas causing significant mass effect and midline shift.
硬脑膜打开后即可行腰大池引流，逐次缓慢释放CSF10ml直至脑组织松弛。	CSF drainage is instituted upon opening of the dura and 10cc aliquots are gradually removed until adequate relaxation is achieved.
由于在手术初始阶段即可阻断大脑镰层面的肿瘤血供，因此笔者并不提倡术前行肿瘤血管内栓塞。	I do not advocate endovascular tumor embolization before surgery since the tumor can be readily devascularized from the falx early during dissection.
随着放射医学的发展，笔者也在不断更新对脑膜瘤手术的理念。	Advances in radiosurgery have affected my philosophy toward meningioma surgery.
考虑到手术要以病人安全为核心，对于侵犯重要动静脉的脑膜瘤，目前手术目标更倾向于次全切除，而不是激进的完全切除。	The goals of surgery, centered on patient safety, have evolved into favoring radical subtotal resection over aggressive total resection of tumors involving important arteries or veins.
影像学随访发现残余肿瘤生长可行放射治疗。	Radiosurgery is reserved for treating the growth of tumor remnants seen on follow-up surveillance imaging.
镰幕交界处脑膜瘤经常会挤压或包绕间脑周围静脉（如Galen静脉及Rosenthal静脉系）及直窦。	Falcotentorial meningiomas displace or encase the diencephalic (veins of Galen and Rosenthal) and straight sinus.
由于该区域血管很重要，术前DSA有助于了解该区域血管分布情况。	Since the vasculature in this region is critical, a preoperative digital subtraction angiogram is beneficial to study these structures and their location in detail.
次全切除有助于确保重要脑血管结构不受损伤。	Radical subtotal tumor resection ensures unharmed cerebrovascular architectures.
镰旁脑膜瘤切除技巧	RESECTION OF PARASAGITTAL MENINGIOMAS
关于肿瘤入路的一些细节问题请参阅经纵裂入路或顶部开颅术章节。	Please refer to the Interhemispheric Craniotomy or Parietal Craniotomy chapters for more details regarding accessing parafalcine meningiomas.
对于镰旁脑膜瘤开颅过程中有一些特别的注意事项。	There are certain considerations in craniotomy planning that are specific to parafalcine meningiomas.
和矢状窦旁脑膜瘤不同，大部分镰旁脑膜瘤采用直切口即可行手术切除。	Unlike parasagittal meningiomas, most parafalcine meningiomas can be readily resected through a linear incision.
切口应跨中线以便暴露上矢状窦并在硬膜打开后通过大脑镰浅部的牵引缝线将静脉窦向侧方移动。	The incision is designed to cross the midline so that the superior sagittal sinus can be exposed by the craniotomy and mobilized through retraction sutures within the superior falx after dural opening.
头侧位可利用重力牵引脑组织从而获得更大的操作空间。	The lateral head position allows gravity retraction to mobilize the brain during operative maneuvers within the interhemispheric corrdior.
体积巨大、双侧生长的镰旁脑膜瘤可通过单侧直切口开颅经大脑镰入路行肿瘤切除，这样可避免双侧开颅，在不损伤对侧矢状窦旁桥静脉的情况下即可切除对侧肿瘤组织。	Giant bilateral parafalcine tumors may be excised through a unilateral linear incision and transfalcine approach. The transfalcine corridor allows resection of the contralateral tumor without a need for a contralateral craniotomy and placing the contralateral parasagittal veins at risk.
图3.采用单侧直切口、经大脑镰入路并利用重力牵引脑组织行巨大镰旁脑膜瘤切除（上图）。	Figure 3: A giant parafalcine tumor (top images) was approached through a unilateral linear incision and transfalcine route using gravity retraction.
侧卧位利用重力牵引使非优势半球远离中线（中图）。	The lateral position mobilizes the dependent nondominant hemisphere away from the midline (middle image).
肿瘤位置通过重建模型图显示（下图）。	The location of the tumor is illustrated through the overlay model (bottom image).
矢状窦旁桥静脉的位置应通过术前影像学检查仔细研究。	The location of parasagittal veins has to be carefully studied on preoperative imaging.
如果肿瘤侧表面覆盖的桥静脉众多导致手术入路受阻，笔者会采用对侧经大脑镰入路显露肿瘤。	If the overlying ipsilateral parasagittal veins are numerous and obstructive, I have employed the contralateral transfalcine route to expose the tumor.
镰旁脑膜瘤表面通常会覆盖一薄层正常脑皮质。	A thin layer of normal cortex is usually covering the parafalcine tumor.
由于颅内压力升高，开颅过程中钻孔的震动可能会损伤脑皮质，除非已行CSF引流降低颅内压。	Due to increased cranial tension, the vibrations of the drill during craniotomy can injure this thin cortex unless CSF drainage is used to achieve decompression.
此外，颅高压失控将导致脑疝，尤其在暴露感觉运动区时会产生严重后果。	In addition, uncontrolled tension can lead to cerebral herniation; this can be especially problematic and consequential during exposure of the sensorimotor cortex.
图4.以矢状窦为基底，在硬膜外侧缘U形打开硬膜瓣，通过纵裂间隙抵达肿瘤部位。	Figure 4: To reach the tumor through the interhemispheric space, I incise the dura in a curvilinear fashion starting at its lateral edge, and create a dural flap based on the venous sinus.
偶尔可以牺牲一些小的引流静脉，但千万不要损伤较大的引流静脉。	Care is taken not to injure any large draining veins. Occasionally, a small draining vein may need to be sacrificed.
如果硬膜剪开位置正好在矢状窦旁桥静脉引流入上矢状窦处，需要调整硬膜剪开位置以免影响静脉回流入窦。	If a parasagittal vein is encountered draining into the sinus, the dural opening must be adjusted to protect the vein’s inlet into the sinus.
图5.大的肿瘤可侵犯凸面硬膜，可在硬膜瓣打开的过程中将其一并切除，但要注意保护毗邻桥静脉。	Figure 5: Large tumors may invade the convexity dura that can be resected during the dural opening while protecting the adjacent parasagittal veins.
首先断开肿瘤血供，接着逐渐切除瘤体，最后将瘤体自周边环绕的脑血管表面分离。	The tumor is first devascularized, then debulked and finally dissected from the surrounding cerebrovascular structures.
广泛分离纵裂蛛网膜、松解桥静脉后，在手术早期即可识别出沿大脑镰生长的肿瘤前后极及肿瘤深部毗邻的血管结构。	Wide dissection of the interhemispheric arachnoid membranes and untethering of the veins allow identification of the anterior and posterior poles of the tumor along the falx and localization of the deep neighboring vascular structures early in surgery.
腰大池引流对于这一步的操作安全至关重要。	Lumbar CSF drainage is necessary for safe execution of this maneuver.
首先，沿大脑镰将肿瘤供血动脉阻断（左图）。	The tumor is first devascularized along the falx (left image).
利用腰大池引流毋需早期减瘤即可使脑组织及肿瘤松弛，从而显露自大脑镰发出的肿瘤供血动脉。	Again, lumbar CSF drainage promotes brain and tumor mobilization without a need for early tumor debulking, therefore exposing the tumor-feeding vessels arising from the falx.
这一方法让快速阻断肿瘤基底部绝大部分血供成为可能。	This maneuver allows aggressive tumor devascularization along most of the tumor base.
由内向外逐步锐性切除肿瘤（右图），也可以使用CUSA替代。	The mass is then enucleated by sharply cutting away tumor from the inside out (right image). Alternatively, an ultrasonic aspirator may be used.
在切除过程中将肿瘤包膜逐渐拉入术腔同时维持肿瘤与软脑膜之间的手术界面。	Next, the tumor capsule can be pulled into the enucleated cavity while maintaining the extrapial dissection planes.
图6.用双极沿肿瘤与软脑膜间的解剖间隙分离肿瘤包膜，双极电凝包膜可使之逐渐收缩。	Figure 6: The tumor capsule is mobilized away from the brain along the extrapial dissection planes, and the capsule is progressively shrunken using bipolar electrocautery.
笔者会用棉片环形覆盖在脑表面，保持软脑膜与肿瘤间的界面。	I use cottonoid patties to circumferentially cover the brain and develop and maintain a plane between the tumor capsule and the pia mater.
注意，该界面是沿肿瘤周边逐渐建立的，而不是在单一位置从浅至深建立。	Notice that the plane is developed along the circumference of the tumor evenly instead of superficially to deep in a single spot.
这样便可轻易移动瘤体（插图），以防出血时操作空间过于狭小。	This allows easier mobilization of the mass (inset image) and avoids small working areas in case of bleeding.
如果软脑膜被侵犯，可利用脑棉“擦除”病变脑组织，并使之远离肿瘤，同时将肿瘤包膜推入术腔（插图）。	If the integrity of the pia is violated, the cottonoid patties are used to “wipe” the brain away from the tumor while the enucleated tumor capsule is drawn into the resection cavity (inset image).
将脑棉折叠“转动”着置入术腔深处建立一肿瘤与脑组织分隔的界面。	The patties are ‘rolled’ into place toward the deepest aspects of the dissection cavity to create the plane.
重要的血管（胼周动脉及胼缘动脉）可能会与肿瘤粘连，予镜下锐性分离。	The critical vessels (the callosomarginal and pericallosal arteries) may be adherent to the tumor capsule and must be microsurgically and sharply dissected away.
每一根血管都必须仔细鉴别其是否肿瘤供血动脉，过路血管必须予以保留。	Each artery should be carefully inspected to determine its function as an en passage versus a tumor-feeding vessel.
为了保护过路血管的完整性，宁可遗留一部分肿瘤在血管表面。	If may be necessary to leave a small piece of tumor over the en passage vessels to protect their integrity.
为了避免血管痉挛，应尽量减少对血管的过度操作。	Aggressive arterial manipulation should be kept to a minimum to avoid arterial spasm.
没有充分分离瘤周就过早的牵拉肿瘤下极将可能导致血管撕裂，造成严重后果。	Premature traction on the inferior pole of the tumor without adequate inspection can lead to vascular avulsion injury and disappointing results.
最后，检查术腔及病变硬脑膜边缘是否存在肿瘤残余。	Finally, the resection cavity and dural edges are inspected for residual tumor.
图7.肿瘤切除后，用钩刀朝着上矢状窦方向切除肿瘤侵犯的大脑镰。	Figure 7: After removal of the tumor, the section of the falx invaded by the tumor may be excised using a curved knife to cut the falx toward the superior sagittal sinus.
如果上矢状窦未被肿瘤侵犯，必要时可牺牲下矢状窦。	The inferior sagittal sinus may be sacrificed if the superior sagittal sinus is patent.
向大脑镰对侧扩张的肿瘤，须横断大脑镰建立对侧手术通道。	Extension of the tumor to the contralateral side of the falx requires transection of the falx and creation of an operative window to reach the tumor.
也可以在开颅时将骨瓣向矢状窦对侧扩展，打开对侧的硬膜切除肿瘤。	Alternatively, the craniotomy may be extended to the other side of the sinus and the tumor exposed through a contralateral paramedian dural opening.
笔者更喜欢从单侧纵裂入路经大脑镰行对侧肿瘤切除术，这样能尽量避免对对侧矢状窦旁桥静脉造成损伤。	I prefer the ipsilateral interhemispheric transfalcine approach since it does not place the contralateral parasagittal veins at risk.
病例展示	Case Example
以下展示的是一例体积巨大、双侧生长的镰旁脑膜瘤手术情况。	The following case demonstrates the intraoperative events related to resection of a large bilateral parafalcine meningioma.
图8.本病例通过单一右侧矢状窦旁入路经大脑镰切除双侧生长的镰旁脑膜瘤（第一排图）。	Figure 8: This bilateral parafalcine meningioma (upper row) was removed via a unilateral right-sided parasagittal transfalcine approach.
利用大脑镰浅部的牵引缝线将上矢状窦向对侧移动（第二排图）。	Traction sutures in the superior falx (second row) gently mobilized the superior sagittal sinus.
彻底阻断大脑镰右侧的肿瘤供血，部分切除肿瘤并仔细分离胼缘动脉（第三排图）。	The tumor on the right-side of the falx was aggressively devascularized, debulked and the callosomarginal artery dissected (third row).
进一步切除肿瘤后暴露胼周动脉，经大脑镰切除对侧肿瘤并切除受累大脑镰（箭头）（第四排图）。	Ultimately, further tumor removal uncovered the pericallosal artery and the contralateral tumor was excised via the transfalcine approach and removal of the affected section of the falx (arrows)(last row).
硬膜缺损采用预先留取的自体骨膜瓣缝合修补。	The previously harvested pericranial graft may be sutured in place if a portion of the dura was resected.
悬吊硬膜用以预防硬膜外血肿及积液。	Tack-up stiches are used to prevent formation of epidural hematoma and fluid collections.
术后须复查MRI。	A postoperative MRI is obtained.
据病人耐受程度，激素缓慢减量。	Steroids may be slowly weaned as tolerated by the patient.
围手术期预防性使用抗癫痫药，若无癫痫发作，术后一周减量。	Prophylactic anticonvulsants are administered perioperatively, but tapered off 1 week after surgery if the patient has not suffered from a seizure.
术后短期内充分补液用以降低静脉血栓发生风险，特别是对于术中静脉窦或桥静脉被反复牵拉甚至被离端的患者。	The patient is kept well-hydrated during the immediate postoperative period to decrease the risk of venous thrombosis, especially if the venous sinus or parasagittal veins were manipulated or sacrificed during the operation.
· 术前应行相关检查（包括MRI T2WI）预估大脑前动脉末端的分布情况。	Preoperative studies must be reviewed (including T2-weighted MR images) to approximate the location of the distal anterior cerebral arteries.
· 尽可能减少桥静脉的牺牲。	Sacrifice of the bridging veins should be kept to a minimum.
· 术中处理大脑镰时，三叉神经-心脏反射可能造成心动过缓或停搏。	The trigeminocardiac reflex may cause bradycardia or asystole when the falx is manipulated.
图1.Walter Dandy 图示脑实质内肿瘤切除技术(Dandy WE. The Brain. Hagerstown, MD: WF Prior Company, 1966)。	Figure 1: Walter Dandy demonstrated the techniques for resection of intraparenchymal tumors (Dandy WE. The Brain. Hagerstown, MD: WF Prior Company, 1966).
世界卫生组织（WHO）分类中的I级和II级胶质瘤被认为是低级别胶质瘤（LGGs）。	World Health Organization (WHO) grade I  II tumors of glial origin are considered low-grade gliomas (LGGs).
有三种常见的类型，即星形细胞瘤、少突胶质细胞瘤和少突星形细胞瘤。	There are three common types of LGGs, namley astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and oligoastrocytomas.
这些肿瘤起源于一种或两种神经胶质细胞类型：星形胶质细胞、少突胶质细胞。	These tumors originate from one or both of the two glial cell types: astrocytes or oligodendrocytes.
肿瘤的切除程度被认为是患者总生存期，无进展生存期，恶性转变最重要的决定因素。	The extent of resection is favored to be one of the most influential determinants of overall survival, progression-free survival, and malignant transformation.
然而，在相应研究中往往存在样本选择偏差，这就需要医生根据目前的实践审慎的运用已发表的数据。	However the selection bias reflected in the corresponding studies demands judicious application of the published data to current practice.
这些肿瘤通常发生在年轻患者（20-64岁，中位数年龄39岁），诊断时一般没有其他合并症，预期生命还很长。	These tumors are typically discovered in young patients (20-64 years of age, with a median age of 39) who are otherwise without comorbidities and with many expected productive years of life, at the time of diagnosis.
在影像学和组织学上，尽管低级别胶质瘤比高级别胶质瘤侵袭性弱，但是大部分病人仍然最终死于肿瘤的进展或恶变。	Although LGGs are more radiographically and histologically less agressive than their high-grade counterparts, many patients still eventually die of their disease because of tumor progression and malignant transformation.
因此，安全的最大限度的肿瘤切除术可以为患者提供更好的生活质量，并且延长寿命。	Hence, safe maximal tumor resection can provide patients with the best opportunity for excellent quality and length of life.
大约60-80%的低级别胶质瘤患者伴有癫痫发作症状。	Approximately 60–80% of patients with LGGs present with seizures of generalized semiology.
患者可出现局灶性癫痫发作，头疼，进展性神经系统症状如肌力下降，感觉丧失，运动障碍等症状和体征。	Focal seizures, headaches, or progressive neurologic symptoms such as weakness, sensory loss, apraxia, or aphasia can also be among the presenting symptoms and signs
在少数情况下，这类肿瘤也因外伤或其他不相关的原因进行影像学检查时被发现。	These tumors are rarely diagnosed incidentally on imaging performed for trauma or other unrelated reasons.
术前评估	Evaluation
通常首选CT扫描或磁共振（MRI）影像学检查。根据患者首次就诊地点不同（急诊科，住院或门诊）选择对应的检查方式。	Usually a computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the first study to reveal the tumor; this depends on the location of first evaluation (emergency department, inpatient hospitalization versus outpatient visit).
MRI平扫增强扫描可以精细的显示和评估肿瘤的范围和对比剂的摄取情况。	An MRI with and without gadolinium contrast is required for fine-detail distinction and assessment of the extent of the tumor and its contrast uptake.
明显强化常提示更高级别的胶质瘤。	Remarkable enhancement is consistent with higher grade tumors.
低级别胶质瘤（尤其是II级胶质瘤）一般不强化。	LGGs tend to be non-enhancing (especially grade II tumors).
但毛细胞性星形细胞瘤（一种低级别的囊性星状细胞瘤）可出现增强的壁结节。	However, pilocytic astrocytoma, an astrocytic LGG, is a cystic tumor with an enhancing mural nodule.
视神经通路胶质瘤是一种弥漫浸润性低级别胶质瘤，可引起视神经，视交叉或视束增粗，往往伴有不同的增强表现。	Optic apparatus gliomas are diffusively infiltrating LGGs causing enlargement of optic nerve, chiasm or tract, with variable pattterns of enhancement.
与高级别胶质瘤完全不同，血管源性脑水肿不是低级别胶质瘤的主要特征。	Vasogenic edema is not a prominent feature of these lesions, in stark contrast to high-grade gliomas.
功能磁共振可以为手术计划提供重要的参考价值。	Functional MRI is important for operative planning is select patients.
它可以帮助明确病变和其相邻的重要皮层功能区之间的关系；但是对于靠近皮层功能区的肿瘤，它不能替代术中脑刺激神经电生理监测的作用。	This modality provides valuable information about the relationship between the adjacent eloquent tissue and the lesion; however, it does not replace intraoperative brain stimulation mapping for tumors closely involved with vital cortices.
其它检查手段，如弥散张量磁共振成像（DTI）能够显示肿瘤周围的白质纤维束，还可以评估肿瘤的浸润程度。	Other studies, such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), map the white matter tracts around the tumor and estimate the degree of their infiltration.
图2. 基底部位于皮层且无增强的低级别胶质瘤的典型影像学表现。	Figure 2: Classic findings for a nonenhancing well-defined cortically-based LGG.
MRIT2加权像上表现为高低混杂信号并伴有点状钙化，这符合少突胶质细胞瘤的诊断。	Evidence of punctate calcification and a somewhat heterogeneous appearance on these T2 sequences are consistent with a diagnosis of an oligodendroglioma.
图3. 紧靠运动皮层的低级别胶质瘤（上图）。	Figure 3: A LGG located in close proximity to the motor cortex (upper images).
功能磁共振和弥散张量磁共振成像显示病变紧靠重要纤维束，但是与其有清晰的边界（中图）。	Functional MRI and DTI revealed close proximity of the lesion, but its distinct borders relative to the vital tracts (middle image).
术中在神经电生理监测指导下进行病变全切除，并没有造成新的神经功能缺失（下图）。	Intraoperative mapping guided gross total resection of the lesion without any new neurological deficits (lower images).
手术切除（与单纯活检相比）的适应症包括获取可靠的组织学诊断，避免活检可能带来的取样错误风险，控制药物难治性癫痫，通过细胞减灭预防肿瘤恶变，和提高病人的生存率。	The indications for resection (versus biopsy alone) include reliable tissue diagnosis without the risk of sampling error, control of medically refractory seizures, prevention of malignant transformation through cytoreductive surgery, and improvement in the patient’s survival.
位于脑功能哑区或者额颞极的大的边界清晰的浅表病灶应当行肿瘤切除，尤其是年轻患者。	Resection of large well-delineated superficial lesions within silent regions or frontotemporal poles of the brain is universally indicated, especially in younger patients.
邻近语言功能区的肿瘤，必须根据患者肿瘤的位置和浸润程度来推荐切除。	Resection of tumors in the vicinity of eloquent areas is recommended, but must be individualized based on the location and diffuseness of the tumor.
考虑到风险收益比，一些外科医生认为应该采取显微手术切除至少大于80%的肿瘤。	Some operators believe that at least 80% of the tumor should be potentially resectable in order to justify the risk-to-benefit ratio for considering microsurgical excision.
肿瘤的浸润程度和位置显著影响手术的效果。	Diffuseness and the location of the tumor dramatically affect the role of surgery.
多灶性肿瘤患者更应该成为活检的候选人。	Multifocal tumors are more likely to be biopsy candidates.
低级别胶质瘤的周围通常没有水肿现象。	Low-grade glial tumors are often not associated with surrounding edema.
术前，术中，术后使用类固醇激素仍充满争议，但是常常被应用。围手术期强烈推荐应用抗惊厥药物。	Pre-, intra-, and postoperative use of steroids are controversial, but often administered; perioperative anticonvulsant medications are strongly recommended.
根据病变累及的相关皮层，决定进行清醒或睡眠状态下的神经电生理检测或标准的开颅术。	The decision to perform an awake versus sleep mapping, or standard craniotomy must be considered, influenced by the eloquence of the involved cortices.
更详细的术前准备，开颅术及其他手术注意事项请参考《Language Mappingfor Glioma》和《Sensorimotor Mapping for Glioma》部分。	Please refer to the sections on Language Mapping for Glioma and Sensorimotor Mapping for Glioma for important details regarding preparation, craniotomy, and other operative considerations.
低级别胶质瘤的手术切除	RESECTION OF LOW-GRADE GLIOMA
一定数量的患者将会因为肿瘤复发需再次手术治疗，因此最初的手术切口应仔细计划。	A reasonable number of patients will require a subsequent reoperation for recurrent tumors. The initial incision should therefore be carefully planned.
线性切口能够为将来手术提供最大的灵活性和较好的血供。	Linear incisions offer the most flexibility and robust vascular support for future reoperations.
虽然小的线性切口是可取的，但是一些患者需要采用神经电生理监测和皮层脑电图评估病灶与周围正常皮层，因此更适合采取较大的切口设计来切除浸润性肿瘤。	Although small linear incisions are desirable, some patients are better served by a larger incision designed for aggressive tumor resection while accessing both the lesion and the surrounding normal cortex for mapping and electrocorticography.
有关手术暴露和开颅术的详细内容，请参考TheneurosurgicalAtlas的其它部分，如《常见手术入路》这一卷。	For general details regarding exposure and craniotomy, please refer to other sections of this Atlas, including the Cranial Approaches volume.
术中导航能够指导合适的开颅范围。	Intraoperative Navigation guides the extents of an adequate craniotomy.
低级别胶质瘤血管较少，切除相对简单。	Low-grade glial tumors are minimally vascular and relatively simple to excise.
图4.硬脑膜可采取曲线或放射状的方式打开。	Figure 4: The dura may be opened in either a curvilinear or stellate fashion.
充分暴露肿瘤与周围正常脑皮质区域。	The exposure must reveal a generous surface of the brain involved with the tumor and the surrounding normal cortices.
外观相对正常的皮质常覆盖肿瘤的边缘。	A ribbon of relatively normal-appearing cortex often covers the edges of the tumor.
在发生脑移位之前（由肿瘤内减压和/或脑脊液释放引起），笔者会根据导航，用丝线标记肿瘤的边缘。	Before brain shift (caused by tumor debulking and/or release of cerebrospinal fluid) occurs, I use navigation data and mark the tumors’ boundaries using a piece of silk suture.
详细检查脑表面会发现，病灶累及的脑回会扩大，变色和血管减少。	A detailed inspection of the brain surface reveals that the involved gyri are expanded, discolored and appear hypovascular.
如果有必要，皮层电刺激可以精确定位功能区的界限。	If necessary, cortical stimulation mapping can precisely localize the boundaries of functional cortices.
周围的大静脉和动脉要识别和保留。	The surrounding large veins and arteries are identified and preserved.
图5.皮层低级别胶质瘤可导致其上覆盖皮质的形态学发生变化（左图）或无变化（右图）。	Figure 5: Cortical LGGs may (left) or may not (right) cause changes in their overlying cortical morphology.
左图显示右额叶运动前区皮层的扩大和矢状窦旁静脉向后移位。	In the left image, the right frontal premotor cortices are expanded and the parasagittal veins are displaced posteriorly.
右图显示右额叶后部的肿瘤（绿色丝线标记边界）引起很小的皮层形态改变。	The right posterior frontal tumor in the right image (bounded by the green suture) is causing minimal alteration in the cortical morphology.
图6.首先用软脑膜下电凝痕迹标记浅表的肿瘤边缘并电凝肿瘤表面的血管。	Figure 6: Initial subpial coagulation marks the superficial tumor edges and devascularizes the surface of the tumor.
保护过路的皮质动脉和静脉。	En passage cortical arteries and veins are protected.
将一块肿瘤组织进行组织学检查并确认术前诊断。	A piece of tumor is sent for histologic examination and confirmation of the preoperative diagnosis.
一些低级别胶质瘤边缘呈浸润性，很难完全划定肿瘤与周围正常/有功能组织的界线，而另一些可以明确划出界线。	Some LGGs have diffuse edges and are difficult to fully delineate from the surrounding normal/functional tissue, whereas others are more definitively demarcated.
换句话说，一些低级别胶质瘤是灰色的，柔软的，可以被抽吸，并有不同的质地；这些特点大大方便肉眼完全切除。	In other words, some LGGs are gray, soft, suctionable, and have distinct textures; these features significantly facilitate their gross total resection.
而另一些肿瘤相对纤维化和异质性使得切除变得复杂，因为术者没有可靠的方法来区分肿瘤与瘤周组织。	Many other tumors are relatively fibrous and have heterogeneous consistency that complicates their resection because the operator has no reliable method to differentiate the tumor from the peritumoral tissue.
轻柔缓慢地移动肿瘤周围的脑组织以尽量减少牵拉损伤。	Gentle dynamic maneuvers to mobilize the surrounding brain minimize retraction injury.
沿大脑纵裂或外侧裂进行软脑膜下肿瘤切除。	Subpial resection of the tumor along the medial interhemispheric or Sylvian fissure opercula is conducted.
图7.笔者常常借助肿瘤组织的一致性特点和术中导航环形离断肿瘤。	Figure 7: I prefer to circumferentially disconnect the tumor as guided by the tumors’ consistency and intraoperative navigation.
如果可能的话尝试整块切除肿瘤。	I also attempt to remove the tumor en bloc, if possible.
中央部分切除会导致导航精度会大大降低。	Central debulking leads to a greater loss of navigational accuracy.
更重要的是，整块切除肿瘤能够提高手术效率，减少失血，使操作者保持沿肿瘤边缘的平面将其切除。	Importantly, en bloc removal of the tumor advances technical efficiency, minimizes blood loss, and allows the operator to keep his or her orientation while maintaining the resection planes along the tumor margins.
在肿瘤的内部和外围同时操作会导致肿瘤边缘混乱不清。	Working simultaneously on both the inside and the periphery of the tumor can lead to confusion about the tumors’ pseudo margins.
吸引器可在术中可用于动态牵拉，以防止切除肿瘤后术腔的塌陷。	The suction apparatus can be used as a vector of dynamic retraction to prevent the wall of the resection cavity from collapsing.
胶质瘤的白质剥离和分离技术值得特别重视。	The technique of white matter dissection and disconnection of glial tumors is worth special emphasis.
双极反复钳取并电凝肿瘤的假包膜，	The bipolar forceps repeatedly grab and coagulate the pseudo capsule.
这种逐步的操作能够乳化假包膜并使其与瘤周的水肿组织分离。	This stepwise maneuver leads to emulsification of the pseudo capsule and its disconnection from the peritumoral edematous tissue.
接下来，用吸引器吸除该乳化物，继续暴露下一层假包膜并进一步电凝和分离。	Next, the suction apparatus removes this emulsified material and exposes the next layer of the pseudocapsule for further coagulation and disconnection.
该技术将分离和电凝同步完成。	The above technique disconnects and coagulates simultaneously.
换言之，是将双极电凝当成肿瘤剪刀一样使用，注意在双极电凝头端持续冲水。（上图，图7插图）。	In other words, the bipolar forceps effectively act as tumor scissors via the repeat spring action of the forceps’ tips while coagulating (above image, figure 7, inset).
肿瘤对双极电凝的反应与正常脑组织有很大的不同；这是另一个可以指导外科医生的重要参数。	The response of the tumor to bipolar coagulation can be quite different than that of the normal brain; this is another important parameter that can guide the surgeon.
一些低级别胶质瘤具有更多的纤维化，而一些肿瘤比正常组织更胶质化。	Some LGGs are more fibrous and some are even more gelatinous that normal brain.
沿着瘤周区域辨别边界有时具有相当大的挑战性。	The distinction along the peritumoral region can be quite challenging.
图8.最后将肿瘤从深部离断并移除。	Figure 8: The tumor is finally disconnected at the depth of the cavity and removed.
然后使用导航评估切除程度。	Navigation is then used to estimate the extent of resection.
为了达到更好的效果，可以进一步切除腔壁组织。	Further resection within the walls of the cavity is necessary to achieve reasonable goals.
切除一直持续到在瘤腔壁各个方向出现干净的白质（明亮且有光泽）。	This maneuver is continued until clean white matter (bright and glistening) is encountered in all directions.
肿瘤颜色常呈晦暗。	The tumor often appears dull.
低级别胶质瘤经常延伸到室管膜水平和进入侧脑室，术者应该确定移除了肿瘤的最深部分。	LGGS often extend to the level of the ependyma and entry into the ventricle confirms removal of the deepest portion of the tumor.
其它术中注意事项	Other Intraoperative Considerations
许多低级别胶质瘤可达到脑回软脑膜的表面，但不累及下方的白质纤维束。	Many LGGs respect the pial surfaces of their gyri, but not the underlying white matter tracts.
由于肿瘤切除引起的脑组织移位使瘤腔深部的导航数据精度大大降低。	The accuracy of navigation drops precipitously at the deeper portions of resection cavity due to the brain shift caused by tumor debulking.
术者对肿瘤质地的判断及应用吸引器“切除”肿瘤时的操作经验，是影响影像学上肿瘤全切的一项重要因素。	The surgeon’s experience in using the tumor’s texture and response to suction in guiding resection can become an important element to ultimately determine the extent of removal on postoperative imaging.
不幸的是，没有可靠和实用的方法来指导术者沿着肿瘤边缘切除低级别胶质瘤；肿瘤的边缘常常看起来像正常脑组织或者浸润到正常脑功能区和白质纤维束。	Unfortunately, there is no reliable and practical method to guide tumor removal for LGGs along their edges; these edges frequently appear and feel almost the same as normal brain or tend to infiltrate normal functional cortices and white matter tracts.
在手术操作初步阶段，术者应该熟悉肿瘤的质地，并利用这些信息来处理肿瘤较模糊的边缘。	The surgeon should become very familiar with the tumor’s texture during the early parts of the operation and use this information for handling the final more indistinct periphery of the tumor.
脑室通常是确定肿瘤深部边界较好的标志。	The ventricle is often a good landmark to define the deeper margins of the resection cavity.
术中磁共振（iMRI）可能有帮助，但在笔者看来，这会降低手术效率，并且不能代替医生的经验。	Intraoperative MRI (iMRI) may be helpful, but in my opinion, is an inefficient use of operative time and cannot replace the surgeon’s experience.
一些肿瘤会吞噬血管（如大脑中动脉）。	Some tumors engulf vessels (such as the middle cerebral artery complex).
应该避免在这些区域激进的使用吸引器而导致小的穿支血管受损伤。	Aggressive use of the suction tip in these regions may lead to vascular injury to the small perforating vessels and should be avoided.
术者必须权衡大范围切除肿瘤与损伤重要血管的风险。	The operator’s enthusiasm for aggressive tumor removal must be balanced against the risk of injury to these vital vessels.
目前，没有任何外科手段可以宣称彻底切除低级别胶质瘤。	Currently, there is no surgical method that can claim complete removal of LGGs.
因此，保留功能仍然是处理低级别胶质瘤的首要任务。	Therefore, preservation of function is the first priority in managing these tumors.
关颅的原则同《常见手术入路》这一卷中的讨论。	The principles of closure are the same as those discussed in the Cranial Approaches volume.
术后48小时内进行MRI检查，评估肿瘤切除程度。	A postoperative MRI is obtained within 48 hours of resection to assess the extent of tumor removal.
对本次手术操作进行审慎的的，诚实的，细致的回顾对提高术者的肿瘤切除技能是必要的。	A critical, honest, and meticulous review of this study is necessary for advancing the surgeon’s learning curve for improving tumor removal for the future patients.
类固醇激素须缓慢减量。	Steroids are weaned slowly as tolerated.
术后预防性应用抗惊厥药物（或增加剂量）。	Anticonvulsants are administered prophylactically (or increased in dosage) during the postoperative period.
操作者通过对肿瘤质地和颜色的判断来确保最大限度的肿瘤切除的经验不能被低估。	The operator’s experience in using the texture and color of the tumor to ensure maximal resection cannot be underestimated.
与正常脑组织相比，肿瘤对双极电凝和抽吸的反应是指导外科医生的另一个重要参数。	The response of the tumor to bipolar coagulation and suction compared with the response of normal brain tissue is another important parameter that can guide the surgeon.
颅内动脉瘤术中破裂的处理策略	Management of Intraoperative Rupture
随着颅内动脉瘤介入治疗技术的进展，许多相对简单的动脉瘤得以处理，使得在需要显微神经外科手术干预的动脉瘤中，复杂动脉瘤日益增多。	With advances in endovascular therapy for intracranial aneurysms, patients with increasingly complex aneurysms are being referred for microsurgical procedures.
随着难度的增加，神经血管外科医师的手术技巧和疗效更加受人关注。	As a result, the skills and outcomes of the neurovascular surgeon are under close scrutiny.
而在手术中，最令人印象深刻、随时可能发生的灾难性并发症之一就是术中动脉瘤破裂（Intraoperative rupture，IOR）。	One of the most dramatic and potentially devastating complications during aneurysm microsurgery is intraoperative rupture (IOR).
正确的控制IOR及其后遗症，将对减少术后并发症产生重要的影响。	Containment of IOR and its sequel can make important contributions to minimizing complications from microsurgery.
据报道，IOR的发生率约为7%-35%，与之相关的危险因素包括术者的手术经验、动脉瘤的大小，形态以及破裂史。	The incidence of IOR has been reported in 7% to 35% of cases. Several factors are associated with IOR: the surgeon’s experience, aneurysm size and morphology, and history of rupture.
需要指出的是，IOR对患者预后的影响目前尚不清楚。	Notably, the effect of IOR on patient outcomes is not well understood.
有些系列病例分析认为IOR并不会明显降低预后，但也有作者持相反的观点。	Some series show no differences in outcomes, whereas others demonstrate poorer outcomes in patients who experience IOR.
Batjer和Samson报道称88%的颅内动脉瘤手术患者可以获得良好的预后，而IOR导致这一比率降至62%。	Batjer and Samson reported an 88% favorable outcome in patients without IOR, which decreased to 62% in patients with IOR.
在一篇关于颅内动脉瘤治疗后再次破裂出血的综述研究（Cerebral Aneurysm Rerupture After Treatment，CARAT）中发现，IOR将使颅内动脉瘤围手术期致残致死率从18%提高到31%。	In a review of the Cerebral Aneurysm Rerupture After treatment (CARAT) study, periprocedural death and disability increased from 18% to 31% in patients who experienced IOR.
血管内介入治疗过程导致的动脉瘤再次破裂与IOR有些相似之处，但也有很大的不同。	Intraoperative rupture during surgery bears some similarities and some major differences from intraprocedural rupture during endovascular treatment.
虽然前者的发生率约为1%-9%，低于IOR，但一旦出现，通过血管内介入处理将非常困难与复杂。	The rates of intraprocedural rupture are significantly lower for endovascular therapy, with studies estimating an incidence of 1% to 9%. Management of IOR, however, may be more difficult through endovascular routes.
在CARAT研究中，血管内介入治疗过程中的动脉瘤再次破裂将使患者死亡率增至64%，是显微神经外科手术的2倍以上。	The CARAT study reported a 64% rate of death and disability in patients experiencing an intraprocedural rupture during endovascular treatment, more than double the rate for microsurgery.
逻辑上也很容易理解，相比开颅手术，血管内介入难以快速控制再出血和减压。	This increased risk of poor outcomes makes logical sense because bleeding often cannot be quickly controlled and decompressed during endovascular procedures as it can during microsurgery.
IOR可以通过一些手术技巧和原则来减少发生率，但无法彻底消除。一旦发生，必须成功的处理以获得良好的结果。	Intraoperative rupture is potentially avoidable, but nonetheless it will occur in some cases, and must be managed successfully to achieve good results.
IOR常在手术过程中几个特定的时间点发生。	IOR can occur at several distinct time points during surgery.
而控制出血的方法与技巧也取决于手术所处的步骤、动脉瘤的部位和形状。	Steps to avoid and deal with it depend on the stage of the operation or phase of dissection, and aneurysm location and configuration.
当IOR发生时，通常根据时间点，采用以下处置措施。	The point at which the complication occurs dictates the management options available.
开颅暴露过程中发生的IOR	IOR During Exposure
尽管在动脉瘤开颅暴露过程中发生的IOR很少见，低于所有IOR的10%，但其后果可能是灾难性的。	Although the occurrence of an aneurysm rupture during exposure is uncommon and associated with less than 10% of all IORs, the outcomes from this event can be catastrophic.
因为在这一阶段，术者还没有充分显露以辨认动脉瘤及其与周边相关血管的解剖结构，甚至某些情况下，还没有开始进行显微分离操作。	During this stage of surgery, the surgeon has not yet had an opportunity to identify the anatomy of the relevant vasculature and the aneurysm, and in some cases, has not even begun microdissection.
从患者进入手术室，到术者开始脑血管显微解剖分离之前的这段时间，属于手术的早期阶段。	This early stage of surgery commences from the moment the patient enters the operating room to the onset of vascular microdissection.
在这一阶段，有很多潜在的因素将导致动脉瘤再次破裂。	There are numerous potential causes of rerupture during this time.
例如气管插管及头钉固定过程中麻醉深度不足，都可引起血压的剧烈波动，从而诱发IOR。	Inadequate anesthesia during intubation and pin placement can lead to wide variations in blood pressure, leading to IOR.
而在去除骨瓣时，术者需非常小心。	The surgeon should exercise care during bone removal.
过度的使用磨钻，尤其在处理蝶骨小翼时，可能将震动传至动脉瘤顶部，导致IOR。	Excessive use of the drill, especially during removal of the lesser sphenoid wing, can transmit vibrations to the aneurysm dome, precipitating rupture.
最后，过度的引流脑脊液会改变动脉瘤的透壁压，导致瘤壁结构不稳定而破裂。	Finally, excessive drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may change the transmural pressure of the aneurysm, leading to destabilization of its wall.
过早、过度地牵拉跟瘤顶粘连紧密的脑叶必须避免。	Aggressive early retraction on the lobe attached to the dome of the aneurysm should be avoided.
比如，发生在后交通和脉络丛前动脉的动脉瘤，过早地牵拉颞叶可能会使瘤顶受到牵拉而引起IOR。	Specifically, in the case of posterior communicating artery (PCoA) and anterior choroidal artery aneurysms, early retraction on the medial temporal lobe may lead to IOR by placing traction on the aneurysm dome.
大脑中动脉瘤顶也常指向外侧附着在颞叶表面，所以处理时应先用吸引器轻柔地动态地牵拉额叶而非颞叶，从而在需要牵拉颞叶进行游离前，安全的暴露出瘤颈的近端和大脑中动脉M2段分叉处。	Middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysms often point laterally and are attached to the surface of the temporal lobe, and therefore gentle and dynamic frontal lobe mobilization using the suction apparatus is a safe strategy to expose the proximal aneurysm neck and the M2 branches before temporal lobe retraction is contemplated.
具体细节请观看该章节起始处第一个视频：Managing Catastrophic Intraop Hemorrhage before Aneurysm Microdissection Techniques。	Please see the first video at the beginning of this chapter for further details.
在处理伴有大量血肿的患者时，如大脑中动脉瘤引起的额颞部血肿，血肿的清除和减压过程中一定要当心。	In patients with sizable hematomas, such as an MCA aneurysm with a frontotemporal clot, care must be taken when decompressing the hematoma.
过度地清除血肿可能会引起动脉瘤囊不稳定导致破裂。	Excessive removal of the clot can destabilize the aneurysm sac, leading to rupture.
但如果血肿清除地太少，术者就可能不得不用力牵拉动脉瘤附着的脑叶增加暴露，这样也会容易导致动脉瘤不稳定。	If too little clot is removed, the surgeon may have to excessively retract the aneurysm-bearing lobe, and this maneuver can also destabilize the aneurysm.
不幸的是，如果IOR发生在充分暴露动脉瘤或控制近端载瘤血管之前，术者的应对方法很有限。	Unfortunately, there are a limited number of options available to the surgeon if rupture occurs before exposure of the aneurysm or proximal control.
一旦发生，术者必须应该快速的吸除出血保持术野清晰，沿着主要的载瘤动脉快速分离，暴露动脉瘤。	In these instances, the surgeon must reduce the hemorrhage and clear the surgical field to allow rapid dissection of the dominant parent feeding artery or the aneurysm.
有些情况下，需要使用粗吸引器来吸除出血，寻找出血来源。	This can sometimes be accomplished by using a large bore suction to follow the hemorrhage to its source.
通过静脉注射腺苷可以暂时地使心率骤停来设法控制出血，尽管时间窗只有30-60秒，但效果极为显著。	The intravenous administration of adenosine can be dramatic and life saving by providing temporary cardiac arrest, although this maneuver often provides only 30 to 60 seconds of relief.
需要注意的是过度的降低血压有导致脑梗的可能。	Profound lowering of the blood pressure may place the patient at high risk for cerebral infarction.
对于大脑前循环动脉瘤，颈动脉压迫可以减少血流，一定程度上有助于控制出血。	If the aneurysm is on the anterior circulation, cervical carotid compression may slow bleeding and allow some control over the hemorrhage.
无论如何，此时术者的最终目标是通过临时阻断夹来控制动脉瘤近端的血管，	Ultimately, the surgeon’s goal is to gain proximal vascular control by placing a temporary clip on the proximal arterial supply to the aneurysm.
这样才能减少汹涌的出血，从而暴露瘤颈并夹闭动脉瘤。	This will provide cessation of torrential hemorrhage to allow microdissection of the aneurysm neck and clip application.
利用异丙酚或巴比妥酸盐快速抑制脑代谢进行脑保护，可能有一定益处。	Brain protection with burst suppression using propofol or barbiturates may be useful.
不推荐采用快速关颅而不尝试近端血流控制、仅寄希望于填塞压迫的方式止血，这种方式往往预后极差。	Rapid closure with no attempt to find proximal control with the hope of intracranial tension tamponading the bleeding is not recommended and will likely result in a poor outcome.
如果术者能够顺着血流喷涌的方向找到出血来源，可以在瘤囊出血点上放置一块蓬松的棉球用吸引器控制出血，然后将自动牵开器轻柔地压迫在棉球上，从而解放出术者的双手来处理动脉瘤。	If the surgeon can follow the jet of blood to its source, he or she may control bleeding by placing a loose cotton ball over the bleeding site of the aneurysm sac. A self-retaining retractor can then be gently placed on the cotton to tamponade the bleeding and free up the surgeon’s hands to definitively deal with the aneurysm.
术者必须注意的是，自动牵开器不能太用力下压，以防进一步撕裂破口。	The surgeon must take care not to exert too much retractor pressure on the aneurysm as this could worsen the tear.
另一种替代的办法，是术者通过用临时阻断夹直接“盲”夹动脉瘤近端的诸条血管，以控制汹涌的出血。	Alternatively, a temporary clip may be “blindly” placed around the group of proximal arteries to briefly control overwhelming bleeding.
显微分离时，未近端控制前发生的IOR	IOR during Dissection without Proximal Control
前述的IOR发生在脑血管显微分离之前，往往跟一些术者无法控制的因素有关。	Rupture of an aneurysm prior to microdissection or during exposure, as described above, is associated with many factors outside the immediate control of the neurosurgeon.
但如果在显微分离暴露过程中发生IOR，则很可能是术者的错误操作引起的。	When an aneurysm ruptures during dissection, the complication is likely caused by a problematic operative maneuver performed by the surgeon.
很幸运的是，相较于开颅暴露阶段，我们有更多有效的措施来控制出血。	Fortunately, at this stage of the operation, there are more options available that allow for improved outcomes when compared with IOR during exposure.
这一阶段引起的IOR最可能的原因，是术者对相关的脑血管解剖结构，即瘤颈、瘤顶的位置和瘤周的重要动脉分支等不熟悉所致。	The most likely cause for IOR at this stage is the operator’s incomplete understanding of the relevant vascular anatomy, namely the location of the aneurysm dome, neck, and important arterial branches.
在额颞入路时，锐性充分地解剖暴露侧裂可以安全地暴露大部分的前循环动脉瘤，释放脑池中脑脊液，降低脑压，最小化IOR的风险，并减少、甚至避免固定牵开器的应用。	Wide opening of the Sylvian fissure by sharp dissection through a frontotemporal approach exposes most anterior circulation aneurysms safely, drains CSF from the cisterns, relaxes the brain, minimizes the risk of IOR, and reduces or eliminates the need for fixed retractors.
多数情况下，IOR发生在术者漫无目的、粗暴地钝性分离过程中，而不是锐性分离时。	Most IOR’s occur because of indiscriminately aggressive blunt as opposed to sharp dissection techniques.
通过锐性分离减少并发症是显微神经外科手术的一个重要特点。	Sharp dissection is one of the hallmarks of microsurgery to minimize complications.
通过精良的剥离子进行轻柔的钝性分离只有在分离薄弱的蛛网膜或血管粘连很少时应用才是较为安全的。	Gentle blunt dissection using fine dissectors is safe as long as this maneuver is performed for delicate arachnoid layers and minimally adherent vascular walls.
处理这一阶段的IOR，既需要术者的技巧，也需要果断的手术操作。	Management options of IOR at this stage of surgery require skill and decisive operative measures.
如果术者保持冷静和理性，采用有计划的、精准的手术操作使患者获得良好的预后是可能的。	Good outcomes are possible if the surgeon remains calm, stays in control, and executes calculated and deliberate maneuvers.
笔者认为，术者有条不紊的专业反应和处理，而非IOR，才是决定预后最重要的条件。	In my opinion, the operator’s thoughtful technical reactions, rather than the IOR, are the most important determinants of final outcome.
控制出血的第一步是采用两个粗吸引器来清晰地暴露视野以确定出血部位。	The first step is to use two large bore suctions to clear the field and identify the site of the hemorrhage.
如果相关血管结构还未充分暴露，笔者会用吸引器一直顺着血喷出的方向找到动脉瘤。	If the relevant vascular anatomy is not sufficiently exposed, I use the suction tip to follow the flow of blood to the aneurysm.
然后，笔者会将一小片脑棉置于出血点、并用吸引器头部轻柔的吸住并给予适当压力按压来控制汹涌的出血。	Next, I obtain reasonable control over the torrential bleeding by placing a small piece of cotton on the point of bleeding and use the suction tip and apply gentle tamponade.
当利用吸引器在出血点控制住出血后，笔者会继续分离血管以增加暴露，然后通常设法利用临时阻断载瘤动脉、或者偶尔也会直接尝试夹闭动脉瘤或出血处。	With suction controlling the hemorrhage at the exact site of bleeding, I can often complete some dissection of the vascular tree for either temporary clip placement on the feeding vessel or rarely tentative clip ligation of the aneurysm/bleeding site.
如果术者需要双手操作来完成血管游离，可以使用自动牵开器的叶片轻压之前出血处放置的脑棉以起到压迫止血的作用。	If the surgeon requires bimanual dissection to finish preparation of the vasculature, a fixed retractor blade can be placed carefully over the cotton on the rupture site to tamponade the aneurysm.
在一些病例中，术者可以先尝试夹闭动脉瘤顶部出血点，然后进一步游离充分后再调整动脉瘤夹位置以夹闭瘤颈。	In some cases, the surgeon can tentatively clip the rupture site on the aneurysm dome and later revise the clip location for complete neck obliteration when dissection is complete.
非常重要的一点是，术者一定要避免着急的盲目夹闭动脉瘤，因为这一操作可能会导致破口增大或者撕裂瘤周的穿支血管。	Most importantly, the surgeon must avoid rushing to blindly clip the aneurysm because this maneuver can worsen the tear in the dome or avulse the surrounding perforators.
因此，笔者建议采用在动脉瘤近端和远端临时夹闭的方法停止局部血流，从而游离确认动脉瘤、载瘤动脉、和重要的临近穿支血管。	I advise the use of local circulatory arrest with proximal and distal temporary occlusion to identify the exact angioarchitecture of the aneurysm, the parent vessel, and important neighboring perforators.
如果临时阻断可行，术中一定要严格避免低血压并应用依托咪酯等镇静麻醉药物降低氧耗和颅内压以达到脑保护作用。	If temporary clipping is possible, hypotension must be avoided and a cerebral protectant such as etomidate should be used.
如果无法临时阻断，强烈推荐通过静脉注射腺苷使心脏暂时停跳。	If temporary clips cannot be used, transient cardiac arrest with intravenous adenosine should be strongly considered.
如果术者惊慌失措，就可能会做出令人失望的决定和导致不良预后。	If the operator panics, it invariably leads to disappointing decisions and poor outcomes.
近端阻断后发生的IOR	IOR after Securing Proximal Control
控制IOR出血的方法取决于这一阶段引起出血的原因。	The methods to control IOR are related to the specific cause during this phase.
夹闭动脉瘤前发生IOR	IOR during Pre-Clip Application
在已充分暴露瘤周解剖结构后，但在实施夹闭前发生的IOR一般是由钝性分离造成的。	During final dissection, but before clip application, the causes of IOR are generally related to blunt dissection.
如果术者没有在夹闭前进行必须的临时阻断，而直接处理张力较高的动脉瘤，就可能导致IOR。	If the surgeon avoids early temporary clipping when necessary, he or she may fight the turgid aneurysm. This “fight” often leads to IOR.
在进行高风险的复杂操作时，笔者更倾向于通过较短时间（5分钟）的临时阻断，提高夹闭过程的安全性。	I have a low threshold for using temporary proximal clip ligation for short periods of time (less than 5 minutes) to enhance the safety of effective clip application while conducting high-risk maneuvers.
在两次临时阻断之间，可以采用2分钟的再灌注以减少脑缺血事件。	Two minutes of reperfusion is allowed in between these periods of temporary occlusion.
动脉瘤的张力可以通过吸引器头轻轻推挤瘤体来确认。	Aneurysm relaxation can then be confirmed by gently “nudging” the aneurysm wall with the suction tip.
如果动脉瘤没有变软塌陷，术者要重新检查临时阻断夹是否夹闭完全、以及是否由于动脉粥样硬化导致相关动脉无法阻断完全。	If the aneurysm does not soften with placement of the clip, the operator should reexamine the temporary clip blades to ensure their circumferential location across the feeding vessel or look for incomplete clip blade closure caused by the presence of atherosclerosis in the wall of the corresponding vessel.
针对后者，可以增加临时阻断夹以确保血管壁完全闭塞；然而，临时阻断动脉粥样硬化的颈内动脉有时是不可能的或不安全的。	Additional temporary clips ensure complete collapse of the walls; however, temporary occlusion of an atheromatous internal carotid artery may be impossible or unsafe.
在这一阶段，IOR也可能归结于术者对分支血管、穿支以及动脉瘤本身的血管结构了解不充分。	At this stage, IOR may also be directly attributed to the surgeon’s lack of understanding of the angioarchitecture of branching, perforating arteries and the aneurysm.
另外，过度地在动脉瘤顶操作游离穿支血管，也容易导致IOR。	In addition, aggressive dissection of perforators while manipulating the aneurysm dome may lead to IOR.
临时阻断不仅可以有效的降低上述操作时的IOR风险，而且无需切除或过度牵拉脑组织，就能显著地实现动脉瘤颈的充分显露。	Temporary clipping can substantially mitigate the risk while facilitating perforator dissection. Moreover, temporary occlusion of the parent vessel significantly facilitates adequate visualization around the aneurysm neck without a need to remove brain or attempt aggressive fixed retraction.
这一阶段的IOR处理依赖于对相关解剖结构的清晰了解和对瘤周血管结构的充分游离。	The management of an IOR at this stage relies on a clear anatomical understanding and complete dissection of the vascular structures surrounding the aneurysm.
理想情况下，应从动脉瘤供血动脉的近端向远端暴露动脉瘤颈、及其瘤周穿支和分支动脉。	Ideally, this dissection is accomplished from proximal to distal along the arterial tree to expose the aneurysm neck as well as the perforating and branching arteries.
这样，动脉瘤即可获得永久夹闭。	At this point, the aneurysm can be permanently clipped.
如果动脉瘤远端瘤颈无法完全看清且夹闭后没有控制住出血，很可能是由于动脉瘤夹叶片太短无法完全夹闭、瘤颈无法完全塌陷闭塞（硬化或有钙化）、甚至瘤颈撕裂而造成。	If the entire distal neck is not visible and clip closure does not stop the bleeding, the clip blades are either too short, not completely collapsing the neck, or there is a tear at the aneurysm neck.
这时应该再次临时阻断以进一步探查。	Therefore, temporary clips should be reapplied to allow further inspection.
在阻断近端血管后，通常通过使用上述脑棉和吸引器的技巧很容易地控制住出血点。	With proximal control in place, bleeding can generally be easily controlled with a piece of cotton and suction tip on the bleeding point.
夹闭动脉瘤时发生IOR	IOR during Clip Application
在用动脉瘤夹夹闭瘤颈的过程中，多种原因可以导致IOR的发生。	At the moment the clip is applied to the aneurysm neck, IOR can occur for several reasons.
如果术者没有充分的解剖分离瘤颈并试图 “盲”夹，瘤夹的叶片就可能会引起瘤颈或瘤体部撕裂。	A tear can occur at the neck or the sac by the tips of the blades if the surgeon has not sufficiently dissected the neck and attempts a “blind” clipping.
IOR也可能会发生在术者试图利用瘤夹叶片尖端来进行瘤颈游离的情况下。	This event can also occur when the surgeon uses the tips of the clip blades to complete dissection along the neck.
图1：如果动脉瘤夹叶片大小不合适，夹闭瘤颈会使血流以更高的压力进入动脉瘤内从而引起瘤内湍流导致IOR的发生。	Figure 1: If the clip blades are improperly sized, the blood enters the aneurysm at a higher pressure and leads to hemodynamic turbulence within the sac, causing an IOR.
通常来说，夹闭的过程中由于瘤颈变成扁圆形，会导致其相对变宽，因此术中发现所选择的瘤夹叶片太短的情形并不少见。	Generally, the neck ovalizes and broadens upon clip application; it is not uncommon to find that the clip is too short.
图2：除了叶片长度不足或放置位置不佳，瘤颈动脉粥样硬化和/或瘤夹叶片垂直于供血动脉施放也是导致瘤颈部分闭合常见的原因。	Figure 2: In addition to improper clip size and placement, partial closure of the clip blades can be caused by atherosclerosis at the neck and/or perpendicular rather than parallel (to the parent vessel) clip application.
这一技术失误常发生于后交通动脉瘤的夹闭过程中。	This technical error most commonly occurs for PCoA aneurysms.
图3：动脉粥样硬化的瘤颈可导致夹闭不全，从而引起IOR。	Figure 3: Incomplete closure of the atherosclerotic neck can cause IOR.
在这张示意图中，可见瘤颈远端的硬化斑块导致近端无法完全闭合，这就需要利用另一枚较短的瘤夹串联夹闭（Tandem Clip）于斑块近端将动脉瘤彻底闭陷。	In this sketch, the distal atheroma prevents approximation of the clip blades. Placement of a second tandem clip short of the atheroma can collapse the neck.
如果硬化斑块在瘤颈近端，就需要使用一枚开窗夹来进行远端瘤颈的夹闭。	If the atheroma is at the proximal neck, a second fenestrated tandem clip is appropriate to close the distal neck.
如果瘤夹闭合后，仍存在少量出血，术者应该进行探查，确保叶片完全覆盖整个瘤颈。	If clip blade closure reveals a modest amount of bleeding, the operator should examine the blades to ensure that they span the entire neck of the aneurysm.
如果叶片已经跨过整个瘤颈，仍需考虑瘤夹叶片闭合是否完全。	If the clip is across the entire neck, complete clip blade closure should be questioned.
需要注意的是，成角、枪刺状及L型的动脉瘤夹闭合力低于直夹。	Angled, bayoneted, and L-shaped clips have lower closing pressures than straight clips.
图4：大部分IOR发生在动脉瘤顶。	Figure 4: Most IORs occur from the aneurysm dome.
但最危险的出血是瘤颈撕裂。	The most dangerous situation is a tear at the aneurysm neck.
这种情况主要是由于瘤颈处硬化斑块破碎撕裂，或在尝试盲夹时瘤夹叶片尖端会刺入瘤颈而引起。	This can occur because of a neck fracture at the level of an atheroma. Alternatively, the tips of the blades can penetrate the neck during blind clipping.
在这些情况中，试图将瘤夹更加靠近载瘤血管处进行夹闭，可能会导致载瘤血管狭窄甚至闭塞。	In these cases, attempts to place a clip more proximally at the neck can result in narrowing or occlusion of the parent vessel.
试图通过缝合瘤颈裂口进行修补是不可能的，而且会导致裂口进一步增大。	Suturing to repair the neck is impossible and leads to further tearing.
一个可行的选择是Sundt-Kees环形血管夹重建技术。	A more tenable option is the Sundt-Kees clip graft.
该装置可以用来重建血管管腔。	This device can be used to reconstruct the vessel lumen.
不幸的是，这种瘤夹很难操作，如果瘤夹不合适的话可能会夹闭穿支血管和临近的分支动脉。	Unfortunately, this type of clip can be difficult to maneuver, and matching the size imperfectly will occlude perforators or adjacent branches.
此外，棉片辅助瘤夹塑性夹闭技术（cotton-clipping technique）相对易操作，且效果良好。	The cotton-clipping technique is effective.
图5：采用棉片辅助瘤夹塑性夹闭技术处理瘤颈撕裂。	Figure 5: Tears at the aneurysm neck are controlled using the cotton-clipping technique.
术者用一小块脑棉覆盖出血点，然后用瘤夹同时夹住脑棉和瘤颈撕裂处。	The surgeon covers the bleeding site with a small piece of cotton.
该技术利用脑棉充当瘤夹叶片的衬垫，堵住裂口的同时不会影响管腔直径。	A clip is then placed across the cotton, just above the tear, allowing the cotton to act as a bolster to seal the tear without compromising the lumen of the parent vessel.
图6：图中展示的是棉片辅助瘤夹塑性夹闭技术处理前交通动脉瘤的具体细节。	Figure 6: Details of the cotton-clipping technique for an anterior communicating artery (ACoA) aneurysm are illustrated.
利用剥离子/瘤夹在瘤颈进行盲目分离，或在瘤颈处存在钙化或硬化斑块会导致瘤颈撕裂或碎裂。	Blind dissection with the dissector/clip blades or the presence of calcification or atherosclerosis at the neck may lead to a neck tear or fracture, respectively.
在扩大暴露后，利用两个大口径吸引器来控制汹涌的出血。	Two large bore suctions control the overwhelming bleeding while exposure is expanded.
下一步请看下图。	Please see the following images for the next steps.
图7：临时阻断供血动脉后，可以更加容易地用动脉瘤夹夹闭出血处。	Figure 7: Closure of the bleeding site using a clip may be possible after temporary occlusion of the feeding vessels.
图8：如果撕裂口太靠近瘤颈处，而无法通过基本的瘤夹技术处理出血点，笔者会用一小片脑棉覆盖堵住出血点，然后吸引器控制出血并保持术野清晰。	Figure 8: If primary clipping is not possible because the tear is too close to the neck, I cover the bleeding site with a small piece of cotton while using the suction tip on the cotton to keep the operative field clear of blood.
再用一枚瘤夹于撕裂的瘤颈处夹住脑棉，使得脑棉起到衬垫的作用，来封堵裂口而不会影响血管管腔直径。	A clip is then placed across the cotton, just above the tear, allowing the cotton to act as a bolster to seal the tear without compromising the lumen of the parent vessel.
最后，如果在没有更好的措施的情况下，术者可以直接用永久夹夹闭供血动脉的受损节段。	Finally, in cases when no other option is available, the surgeon can trap the aneurysm by occluding the damaged segment of the feeding vessel with permanent clips.
尽管这个方法可以成功的孤立动脉瘤停止出血，但导致脑缺血并发症的风险很高。	Although this method successfully excludes the aneurysm, it is associated with a high risk of ischemic complications.
如果怀疑侧支循环代偿不良，那么必须进行颅外-颅内搭桥或颅内-颅内搭桥增加脑血流量。	If poor collateral circulation is suspected, an extracranial to intracranial (EC-IC) or intracranial to intracranial (IC-IC) bypass is necessary.
以下是在最常见的动脉瘤亚型中避免和处理IOR的技巧和原则总结。	Following is a review of the relevant technical nuances for avoidance and management of IOR among the most common surgically treated aneurysm subtypes.
特定动脉瘤亚型的技术差别	Technical Nuances for Specific Aneurysm Subtypes
前交通动脉瘤	Anterior Communicating Artery Aneurysms
复杂的血管解剖结构和常见的变异（包括前交通动脉复合体的旋转）可能会使术者迷失方向。	The corresponding complex regional vascular anatomy and its frequent variations (including rotation of the ACoA complex) may disorient the surgeon.
由于众多的临近血管分支和穿支血管，包括双侧A2和下丘脑的穿支血管，细致地分离解剖瘤体和瘤颈通常是必要的。	Due to the presence of numerous adjacent branching and perforating arteries, including bilateral A2s and hypothalamic perforators, elaborate dissection of the aneurysm neck or dome is often necessary.
这些高风险的解剖分离操作会大大增加在处理前交通动脉瘤时发生IOR的风险。	These high-risk dissection maneuvers increase the risk of IOR among ACoA aneurysms.
深入地了解瘤颈的形态及其与A1优势侧的关系对于精准地夹闭动脉瘤、避免不完美的夹闭非常重要。	An in-depth understanding of the aneurysm neck morphology in relationship to the dominant A1 is important for accurate clip application and avoidance of suboptimal clipping.
夹闭不全的常见原因是瘤颈显露不充分，尤其常见于瘤顶朝向上方或后方的病例中。	Partial clipping due to inadequate neck visualization, especially in the case of superior- and posterior-pointing aneurysms, can be problematic.
瘤顶朝向下方的动脉瘤则有可能会影响对侧A1的近端控制。	Inferior-pointing aneurysms may interfere with securing proximal control on the contralateral A1.
临时阻断可使得动脉瘤张力降低，有利于术者在众多重要的临近分支血管间更准确地夹闭动脉瘤颈，而不用过度地牵拉脑组织。	Temporary occlusion is especially helpful in deflating the aneurysm sac and allowing accurate clip application while maneuvering the clip blades along numerous important adjacent branches and minimizing the use of fixed retraction.
在夹闭瘤顶指向前方和上方的动脉瘤时，采用开窗直夹（跨越同侧A2）往往可以获得最好的效果。	The use of straight fenestrated (ipsilateral A2 within the fenestration) clips for anterior- and superior-pointing aneurysms often leads to best results.
在术中最容易导致IOR的原因是没有在充分理解瘤颈远端和前交通复合体及对侧A2的关系的情况下，进行“盲”夹。	The most common cause of IOR is relatively blind placement of the clip blades because the surgeon has not fully understood the relationship of the distal neck to the ACoA complex and contralateral A2 branches.
术中试图采用动脉瘤夹叶片“盲”分瘤颈很可能会导致较大的瘤颈撕裂出血。	Blind dissection of the neck using the clip blades may lead to large tears at the neck.
而在处理小动脉瘤时，由于需要推移动脉瘤顶来充分暴露瘤颈，也可能引起麻烦的破裂出血。	Small aneurysms can be troublesome since generous exposure of their neck often requires some mobilization of their dome.
术中需要切除部分直回时，注意要局限于内侧的软膜以内，直至充分的近端显露为止。	Removal of the gyrus rectus should be limited to the medial pial membranes until adequate proximal exposure is secured.
最重要的是，只有对术前DSA仔细分析，明确了解术区脑血管解剖结构才能最大限度地减少IOR并发症的发生。	Ultimately, a clear understanding of the regional vascular anatomy based on preoperative angiography minimizes complications.
大脑中动脉瘤	Middle Cerebral Artery Aneurysms
侧裂的完全分离将会提供更大空间来处理大脑中动脉血管结构，从而更好地暴露且精准地夹闭大脑中动脉分叉处动脉瘤。	Wide opening of the Sylvian fissure offers an ample amount of space to manipulate the MCA vascular tree for accurate clip application of MCA bifurcation aneurysms.
然而，这些动脉瘤瘤颈处经常发生的粥样硬化和钙化会导致动脉瘤夹闭合不全。	However, the common occurrence of atherosclerosis and calcification at the neck of these aneurysms can interfere with complete clip blade closure.
侧裂内的大量积血也会使术者无法分清解剖结构从而操作犹豫不决，或在没有近端控制前就错误地先暴露瘤顶。	Significant intrasylvian blood can also cause the surgeon to wander and mistakenly expose the dome without proximal control.
由于相对于前交通动脉瘤，大脑中动脉瘤更加表浅，而且可以获得更充分的显露空间，因而大多数发生于此处的IOR可以较容易地利用脑棉控制。	Most IORs are easily managed using a piece of cotton over the bleeding point because the available space and superficial level of dissection readily allows microsurgical manipulation in contradistinction to the limited space afforded during exposure of ACoA aneurysms.
常见的IOR原因之一是在分离与瘤顶粘连紧密的过路（en passage）血管时，将瘤顶穿孔出血。	One of the most common causes of IOR is manipulation of the adherent en passage vessels attached to the aneurysm dome and subsequent penetration of the dome.
临时阻断大脑中动脉M1段可使过路血管分离时更加从容和安全。	Temporary M1 clipping provides the safest opportunity to dissect away the en passage vessel.
即使在游离时出现意外瘤体穿孔导致少量出血，也可采用小片脑棉覆盖出血点，同时完成动脉瘤永久夹闭。	Low flow bleeding in the case of an inadvertent sac penetration can be controlled via a small piece of cotton at the dissection site over the dome while finalizing permanent clip application.
后交通动脉瘤	Posterior Communicating Artery Aneurysms
由于颈内动脉血流量相对较高，后交通动脉瘤手术时发生的IOR场景往往最令人印象深刻。	Due to the relative high flow of blood within the parent carotid artery, this aneurysm subgroup leads to the most dramatic IORs.
垂直载瘤血管方向施放动脉瘤夹可能是IOR的最常见原因（见图2）。	Clip application perpendicular to the carotid artery is often the most likely cause of IOR (see Figure 2).
由于后交通动脉瘤瘤壁厚，垂直的瘤夹施放可能造成瘤夹叶片闭合不全而导致瘤内血流动力学剧变，引起IOR。	Because of the PCoA aneurysm’s thick walls, perpendicular clip application may lead to incomplete closure of the blades and intrasaccular hemodynamic turbulence, leading to IOR.
此外，垂直方向的夹闭经常容易低估（尤其是大型动脉瘤）瘤颈的大小，使得瘤夹方向倾斜，导致夹闭不全。	Furthermore, perpendicular clipping most often underestimates (especially in the case of large aneurysms) the size of the neck and leads to oblique partial clipping across the neck.
而在未临时阻断颈内动脉的情况下，过度的推移瘤体，尝试分离与瘤体粘连的脉络膜前动脉时也会引起IOR。	Overzealous dissection of adherent anterior choroidal arteries by mobilizing the dome without temporary clip ligation of ICA may also cause IOR.
因此，利用直型或成角度的开窗夹（跨颈内动脉）平行于颈内动脉方向夹闭瘤颈使瘤体闭陷，结果最理想。	For these reasons, straight or angled fenestrated clips (ICA within the fenestration) provide best results by collapsing the neck parallel to the axis of the carotid artery.
而且由于开窗夹的跨血管设计，术中往往可以避免过度地分离临近粘连血管，包括脉络膜前动脉。	Because of the presence of fenestration within the clip, aggressive dissection of adherent vessels, including the anterior choroidal arteries, is often not mandatory.
小脑后下动脉动脉瘤	Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery Aneurysms
在处理远端与小脑扁桃体粘连的小脑后下动脉瘤时严禁用力牵拉小脑。	Forceful cerebellar retraction should be avoided during surgery of the distal posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) aneurysms attached to the tonsils.
指向前方、更靠近小脑后下动脉近端的动脉瘤可能与斜坡硬膜粘连，对它们的操作容易导致动脉瘤底部撕裂。	Anterior-pointing, more proximal aneurysms may adhere to the dura of the clivus; their manipulation leads to a tear at the fundus.
由于小脑后下动脉的血管直径很小，瘤颈撕裂就将显著的影响小脑后下动脉的通畅性。	Because of the small diameter of the PICA, a tear at the aneurysm neck can significantly jeopardize the patency of this artery.
在此情况下，前述的棉片辅助塑性夹闭技术可用于挽救小脑后下动脉。	The cotton-clipping technique described above can salvage the artery in this situation.
同样地，垂直于小脑后下动脉施放动脉瘤夹也可能导致载瘤动脉狭窄闭塞或动脉瘤夹闭不全。	Similarly, clip application perpendicular to the PICA may lead to either parent vessel occlusion or partial clipping.
施放动脉瘤夹前的IOR常见原因包括：	The most common causes of IOR before clip application are:
不加选择地钝性分离，及过度的术中脑牵拉；	Use of indiscriminate blunt dissection and aggressive brain retraction
利用钝头剥离子在瘤周盲目分离，术者无法准确的识别瘤周血管解剖结构；	Blind dissection around the aneurysm using a blunt probe and the surgeon’s inability to identify the correct vascular anatomy around the aneurysm.
在没有足够显露的情况下，“盲”夹动脉瘤。	Blind insertion of the clip blades along the aneurysm neck without adequate visualization.
换句话说，寄希望于用瘤夹叶片来分离暴露动脉瘤颈从而完成夹闭。	In other words, the tips of the clip blades are expected to complete the dissection.
在面对搏动的瘤囊，高度紧张的术者虽然试图避免IOR，但过早地施放永久夹；	In the presence of a pulsatile sac, the nervous operator wants to avoid IOR and places the permanent clip prematurely.
在术中未临时阻段载瘤动脉前过于激进地处理张力较高的动脉瘤；	Aggressive aneurysm manipulation—fighting against the “high-turgid” aneurysm—without temporary parent artery occlusion.
载瘤动脉临时阻断不完全，通常由于临时阻断夹未能完全跨过载瘤动脉，或粥样硬化斑块而引起临时阻断夹无法完全闭合导致。	Incomplete temporary parent vessel occlusion due to inadequate placement of the temporary clip across the parent artery or the presence of arteriosclerotic plaque prohibiting closure of the temporary clip blades.
处理：	Management
术中仔细辨认局部血管解剖结构，可以使术者在有所准备的情况下，自动脉瘤近端向远端游离，逐步暴露动脉瘤。	Careful confirmation of regional angioanatomy will allow the surgeon to dissect proximal to distal along the arterial tree, reaching the aneurysm prepared.
临时阻断载瘤动脉可使得瘤颈获得充分的游离和显露，从而更加从容精准的施放永久夹。	Temporary occlusion of the parent vessel facilitates adequate dissection and visualization around the entire breadth of the neck and more accurate permanent clip application.
在临时阻断后，必须先确认瘤内压下降（例如通过轻柔的推挤瘤壁观察其塌陷程度），才能对动脉瘤进行进一步操作。	Following temporary clip placement, relaxation of the aneurysm should be verified (by gentle nudging of the aneurysm wall) before aneurysm manipulation is contemplated.
如果在IOR发生时，无法看清瘤颈远端且夹闭瘤颈无法彻底止血，需怀疑是否存在瘤颈撕裂，此时进行临时阻断和彻底探查很有必要。	If the entire distal neck is not visible and clip closure does not stop bleeding, a tear at the aneurysm neck is suspected and temporary clipping and thorough inspection is necessary.
动脉瘤夹闭过程中发生IOR的常见原因包括：	The most common causes of IOR during clip application are:
部分夹闭会导致动脉瘤瘤内压骤然增高引起破裂出血.	Partial clipping leads to increased hemodynamic pressure within the aneurysm sac and rupture.
动脉瘤顶有可能与周围的脑组织粘连。	The aneurysm dome may be adherent to the surrounding brain.
在施放瘤夹过程中，对瘤顶的牵拉可能导致IOR，或使瘤夹叶片难以完全闭合。	Traction on the dome during clip placement may prevent complete clip blade closure.
瘤颈处的粥样硬化斑块可能会导致夹闭不全或IOR。	Atherosclerotic plaque at the aneurysm neck leads to partial clipping and IOR.
在夹闭动脉瘤时，夹闭方向尽可能平行于载瘤动脉长轴，尤其是直接起源于颈内动脉的动脉瘤。	Clip application parallel to the long axis of the parent vessel is imperative when anatomically possible, especially for aneurysms originating directly from the internal carotid artery.
垂直方向的夹闭可能会导致瘤夹叶片闭合不充分或迟发的瘤夹移位。	Perpendicular clipping may lead to inadequate clip blades closure and delayed clip displacement.
在施放瘤夹前彻底地检查动脉瘤及瘤周的解剖结构至关重要。	Thorough inspection and understanding of the aneurysm anatomy is critical before clip application.
在处理大的动脉瘤的过程中，仔细地解剖及暴露瘤体和瘤顶，对减少夹闭时过度的瘤顶牵拉非常重要。	For large adherent aneurysms, careful dissection of the midbody and dome of the aneurysm may be needed to prevent excessive traction on the aneurysm dome during clip closure.
对于伴有粥样硬化的宽颈动脉瘤，需事先考虑和准备利用串联夹闭技术以避免夹闭不全。	Tandem clipping should be considered early to avoid partial clip closure among aneurysms with wide atherosclerotic necks.
总结	Final Thoughts
在IOR发生时，术者应该同时使用两把吸引器来吸净视野的血液以便于清楚地暴露出血部位，而后就可改用一把吸引器置于出血点保持术野清晰。	During IOR, the surgeon may start with two suctions to clear the field and identify the site of the leak and then keep the field clear using only a single suction over the exact site of the hemorrhage.
在保持正常血压的状态下，临时对载瘤动脉近端和远端进行阻断和使用脑保护药物，可使得术者能够继续进行锐性分离。	Local circulatory arrest via proximal and distal temporary occlusion of the parent vessel(s) and administration of cerebral protectant, while maintaining normotension, will allow continuation of sharp dissection.
这样，就能够更精准地探查出血究竟来自瘤颈、载瘤动脉还是重要的毗邻穿支血管。	Exploration of the exact site of the bleeding relative to the aneurysm neck, parent vessel, and important neighboring perforators can then be completed.
如果夹闭后仍然有少量出血，此时应先检查瘤夹叶片是否已完全跨过动脉瘤颈。	If closure of the clip blades reveals a modest amount of bleeding, the operator should examine the blades to ensure that they encompass the entire aneurysm neck.
如果是，需考虑存在瘤颈处粥样硬化或钙化导致夹闭合不全的可能。	If the clip is across the entire neck, inadequate clip closing pressure caused by undetected atherosclerosis or calcification should be considered.
串联夹闭技术，即利用一枚开窗夹和直夹进行串联夹闭，可用于保证动脉瘤夹闭完全。	A tandem clipping technique using both a fenestrated and straight clip may be necessary to ensure complete obliteration of the aneurysm.
在靠近瘤夹叶片近端的斑块可能导致瘤颈远端闭合不全，	Plaque near the hinge of the clip may prevent distal clip closure.
在此情况下，可采用一枚开窗夹跨过斑块，夹闭远端瘤颈。	In such circumstances, a fenestrated clip may be added to close off the distal neck.
如果首枚动脉瘤夹叶片过短，可先用一枚更长的瘤夹串联重叠夹闭，再将第一枚瘤夹去除并将第二枚瘤夹调整至瘤颈近端以完全覆盖瘤颈。	If the initial clip is deemed too short, a second, longer clip may be applied in tandem with the first one; the first clip is then removed and the second clip moved proximally across the neck.
如瘤夹完全闭合后出现大量出血需怀疑颈部撕裂的可能，需考虑采用局部临时阻断和棉片辅助塑性夹闭技术进行处理。	Excessive bleeding after closure of the clip blades raises the suspicion of a neck tear, and the cotton-clipping technique should be considered along with local circulatory arrest.
个人体会	Personal Reflections
IOR是可以预防的并发症，但是如果术者不能充分理解发生原因及处理措施，结局也可能是灾难性的。	IOR is a preventable complication that can be devastating if the surgeon does not understand the causes and management options available.
对动脉瘤本身及瘤周动脉解剖结构的正确认识是预防和治疗IOR的关键因素。	Accurate knowledge of the anatomy of the aneurysm and surrounding vasculature is the keystone to both prevention and treatment of IOR.
最重要的是，在遇到IOR时术者切忌盲目地去夹闭动脉瘤来止血。	Most importantly, the surgeon must not rush to clip blindly in an effort to stop the hemorrhage.
通常引起患者死亡和其它并发症的原因不是IOR本身，而是术者接下来的处理方式，其决定了患者的预后的好坏。	It is usually not the rupture that causes death and disability, but the surgeon’s subsequent actions that can be the difference between a good or poor outcome.
最后需要指出的是，IOR相关的主要并发症通常是术者在出血汹涌、且未能获得充分显露的情况下，过早的尝试永久夹闭，导致周边血管神经的损伤而引起的。	Ultimately, major complications related to IOR are caused by the surgeon’s premature reaction while placing a permanent clip in the event of torrential bleeding without adequate visualization, leading to vascular and cranial nerve injuries.
胶质瘤的语言功能区定位	Language Mapping for Glioma
图1.Cushing的插画体现了他对皮质电生理学的热情与兴趣。	Figure 1: Cushing’s own illustrations show his passion for cortical electrophysiology.
Forester, Penfield和Boldrey则进一步完善了皮层刺激技术，从而形成了现在我们对这项技术的理解。	Forester, Penfield, and Boldrey further refined the techniques of cortical stimulation and shaped our understanding of this method.
至于左图是否是Cushing有意临摹了现代医学之父William Osler 的侧脸，目前仍众说纷纭。	There is some controversy if Cushing had intended to sketch the face of William Osler in the left image.
胶质瘤手术的目标是在避免神经损伤的同时最大限度切除肿瘤。	The goal of glioma surgery is to maximize tumor resection while avoiding neurologic morbidity.
手术切除的优势还体现在：避免单纯活检可能造成的取样误差、控制癫痫发作、减轻占位效应导致的症状、在低级别胶质瘤中细胞减灭术可以降低未来恶性变的几率。	Other advantages of resection include a decreased risk of sampling error associated with the biopsy procedure, seizure control, improvement of symptoms caused by mass effect, and in the case of low-grade gliomas, a decreased risk of future malignant transformation through cytoreductive surgery.
切除范围与肿瘤进展及总生存期相关。	The extent of resection correlates with time to progression and overall survival.
肿瘤复发风险较大的区域是肿瘤边界2cm内或MRI图像上可见的对比增强区。	The greatest risk of tumor recurrence occurs within 2 cm of the tumor margin or contrast-enhanced region seen on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
因此，理想的切除范围是在确保安全的情况下，略微扩大至影像学显示的肿瘤边界之外，但是若因此带来术后神经缺陷，患者的生存获益反而减少。	Therefore, one may conclude that the ideal resection should extend slightly beyond the tumor borders based on imaging, if deemed safe. The limiting factor is the potential loss of survival advantage if a postoperative neurologic deficit is inflicted.
因此，显而易见，在安全的前提下最大限度切除肿瘤是外科治疗的目的。	Clearly, a safe surgery while removing the maximal amount of tumor is the goal.
临近的功能皮层与白质纤维束常常限制了肿瘤浸润部位切除的范围，因此常使用皮层刺激来判断语言中枢及白质的精确位置。	The vicinity of functional cortices and white matter tracts often limits the extent of resection within the adjacent tumor-infiltrated brain. To circumnavigate eloquent cortex and white matter, cortical stimulation is used to precisely localize or map function.
在这种刺激下，局部皮质发生去极化，通过特殊的物理效应使局部的皮层暂时丧失功能。	During this form of stimulation, a very focal region of the cortex is depolarized, resulting in certain physical effects leading to transient localized cortical dysfunction.
这在语言功能上尤其明显，当针对Wernicke区进行命名能力检测时，患者可出现明显的语言停顿（命名困难）。	Specifically for language function, speech arrest when naming is used as an indicator of Wernicke’s area because naming difficulty is a major component of most aphasias.
皮层功能定位技术的适应症	Indications for the Procedure
药物镇静下“清醒”状态开颅通常适用于低级别胶质瘤（LGGs）的手术，也有用于侵犯或临近语言中枢的高级别胶质瘤（HGGs），偶尔也可用于位于语言中枢的脑转移瘤，皮层功能定位技术可保证安全切开皮质并规划手术路径，避免损伤具有功能的脑回及传导束。	The “awake” craniotomy under conscious sedation is typically advocated for resection of low-grade gliomas (LGGs) and less frequently for high-grade gliomas (HGGs) involving and/or adjacent to the eloquent regions of the brain. Occasionally, cerebral metastases in eloquent areas may benefit from cortical mapping so that the corticotomy and operative trajectory are planned safely, so that the surgeon avoids the functional gyri and tracts.
一般而言，当胶质瘤位于优势半球颞叶的中部至后部，额叶的中部至后下部，后额叶及前顶叶时，应考虑进行唤醒麻醉下皮层功能区定位。	As a general rule, gliomas involving the dominant mid to posterior temporal, mid to posterior inferior frontal, posterior frontal and anterior parietal lobes should be considered for an awake mapping procedure.
换言之，与Broca区、Wernicke区，Rolandic皮层，运动辅助区，放射冠、内囊、钩束相关的侵袭性肿瘤均适合行功能定位。	In other words, infiltrative tumors associated with the Broca’s and Wernicke’s cortices, as well as rolandic cortex, supplementary motor area, corona radiata, internal capsule, and uncinate fasciculus are suited for mapping.
血管损伤性疾病则很少需要在清醒状态下实施手术。	Vascular lesions rarely require an awake method.
脑动静脉畸形（AVMs）手术常常因为出血多而变得复杂冗长，它需要严格的头颅固定，也需要全身麻醉来控制pCO2，脑氧代谢和血压；这些参数在非气管插管状态无法可靠监测。	AVM operations can be complicated by excessive blood loss are often lengthy, demand very rigid head immobilization, and require general anesthesia to control pCO2, brain oxygen metabolism, and blood pressure; these parameters cannot be reliably accomplished without intubation.
笔者主要对低级别胶质瘤患者（LGGs）使用唤醒麻醉下皮层功能区定位技术。	I use awake mapping primarily for LGGs.
对于侵犯皮质功能区及传导束的高级别胶质瘤（HGGs）而言，哪怕术中保留了这些功能区组织，术后也常出现神经功能受损。	It has been my experience that resection of HGGs infiltrating the functional cortices and tracts often leads to neurologic morbidity despite preservation of these functional tissues.
同时次全切除HGGs与术后生存率下降及血肿形成相关（因此笔者倾向于全切肿瘤，而非保留功能区组织，译者注）。	Subtotal resection of HGGs is associated with postoperative decline and risk of hematoma formation.
然而，在对于那些特定的、并未侵犯功能区而仅仅毗邻功能区的HGGs，笔者确实在术中使用皮层定位技术。	However, I do use mapping for specific HGGs that do not directly infiltrate the functional areas, but are adjacent to these areas.
这样可以确保肿瘤完整切除的边界恰恰位于无功能区。	This algorithm allows mapping to secure resection of immediate nonfunctional peritumoral borders in expectation of radical tumor removal.
对于岛叶肿瘤（不论是否处于优势半球）及那些与中央小叶（感觉运动皮层）密切相关的肿瘤，笔者均使用唤醒麻醉下皮层定位技术。	I use awake mapping for both dominant and nondominant insular tumors and those intimately associated with the central lobule (sensorimotor cortices).
若肿瘤仅位于中央小叶附近而不侵犯其中的，可以实施全麻下定位。	Tumors that are nearby but do not directly infiltrate the central lobule can undergo sleep mapping.
唤醒麻醉下定位提供了最可靠精准的皮层定位，同时对麻醉干扰最小。	Awake mapping provides the most reliable and precise mapping method with minimal interference from anesthesia.
胶质瘤的感觉运动区定位以及其适应症请参阅《胶质瘤手术感觉运动功能区定位技巧》一章。	Sensorimotor Mapping for Glioma and its indications are discussed in another chapter.
图2. 面部功能区定位时，必须保证患者舒适。	Figure 2: Mapping the face area. The patient must be comfortable.
术者与患者的沟通是手术成功的关键。	The patient-surgeon interaction is the key to success.
清醒开颅术的成功实施必须建立在严格的患者筛选基础上。	Appropriate patient selection is critical for successful execution of an awake craniotomy.
患者需要镇静地配合完成长达4-5小时的手术。	The patient must be cooperative for 4-5 hours with a calm demeanor.
紧张、不合作、认知能力受损以及语言、运动能力显著受损的患者并不适合这类手术。	Anxious, uncooperative, cognitively-compromised patients, or those with significant baseline language or motor deficits will fail awake procedures.
术前可使用标注“这是…”、“这些是…”的幻灯片评估患者的语言能力和阅读能力，其命名失败率需25%。	Preoperative language function is evaluated for a naming failure rate of 25% using slides that start with ‘this is a …’ or ‘these are…’ to concurrently test reading functions.
每张幻灯重复测试3次。	Each slide is tested three times.
其次，要求患者从1数到10后伸舌，判断其运动语言功能。	The motor aspect of speech is evaluated by asking the patient to count from 1-10 and then to protrude the tongue.
如果患者语言能力明显受损，则其可在服用大剂量类固醇激素一周后复测，或仅在全麻状态下实施肿瘤减压手术。	If the patient is suffering from significant deficits, he or she may be retested a week later after treatment with high-dose steroids or be operated on asleep with a goal of tumor debulking only.
通过术前影像学检查可从解剖角度预测Broca区与Wernicke区是否被肿瘤累及以及是否有唤醒手术的指征。fMRI可以辅助判断。	Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas can be anatomically estimated on preoperative imaging to assess their involvement with the tumor and the need for an awake surgery;  fMRI can assist with this task.
深部肿瘤可能需要对覆盖其上的皮层进行功能定位来规划合适的手术路径。	Deep tumors may require mapping of the overlying cortex for selection of an appropriate operative trajectory.
图3.  这个位于额叶后下方深部的肿瘤需要在患者清醒状态下进行语言区定位，从而规划出可以安全到达肿瘤的手术路径（上图）。	Figure 3: The deep and posteroinferior frontal location of this tumor required awake speech mapping to guide a safe transcerebral corridor to reach the tumor (upper images).
该高级别胶质瘤患者术后若出现功能缺陷会限制其生存获益。	Development of a neurologic deficit can blunt or eliminate any survival advantage gained by resection of this high-grade glioma.
左侧开颅后，运动性语言中枢的最下方被标记为Lex（中图），在语言功能区前方切开皮层后显露肿瘤，最终安全地全切肿瘤（下图）。	Following a left-sided craniotomy, the most inferior location of motor speech was mapped (Lex)(middle image) and a corticotomy, just anterior to this eloquent cortex, was made to reach the tumor. Ultimately, gross total resection of the tumor was performed safely (lower images).
如今，功能影像学研究如fMRI正逐渐成为另一种定位功能区的热门方法。	Functional imaging studies including fMRI are increasingly popular as an alternative method to map function.
这些影像学手段并不能取代直接皮层电刺激的金标准地位，但是它们可以指引术者在术中更有效地完成定位。	These imaging modalities do not replace the gold standard technique of cortical stimulation mapping. Instead, they guide the surgeon to map function more efficiently intraoperatively, rather than conducting an exploratory mapping strategy.
笔者并不赞成仅靠fMRI数据实施肿瘤切除术。	I do not recommend resective surgery based on only fMRI data.
此外，尽管fMRI在判断运动感觉皮层时相对可靠，可能可以取代少数患者皮层电刺激的需求，然而，它在判断语言功能区时可靠度不尽人意。	In addition, although fMRI may be reliable for identifying sensorimotor cortices and may obviate the need for cortical stimulation in a small number of patients, it is much less reliable for identifying language functions.
事实上，PET与fMRI正确判断功能区位置的敏感性约为75%与81%，特异性分别为81%与53%。	In fact, the sensitivity for positron emission tomography (PET) and fMRI for correctly identifying the location of function are ~75% and 81%, respectively, and their specificities are 81% and 53%, respectively.
大多数人（包括那些左利手们）都为左脑主导型。	Most people are left hemisphere dominant, including those who are left handed.
在右利手中，98~99%的人左脑为优势半球。	Among right-handed people, 98-99% are left hemisphere dominant.
仅仅约19%的左利手语言主导区位于右脑，另约20%的人语言功能区同时位于两个半球。	Only around 19% of left-handers have right-hemisphere language dominance, and another ~20% process language functions in both hemispheres.
同时，双利手的语言区分布情况与左利手们大致相同。	Moreover, the incidence of language distribution among ambidextrous people is broadly similar to that found in left-handed individuals.
总体来说，约有93%的人类左脑半球为语言优势半球。	Overall, ~93% of all people demonstrate left hemisphere language dominance.
如果对左利手患者的优势半球判断尚有疑问，可行Wada测试或fMRI检查。	If there is any question regarding the cerebral dominance in a left-handed patient, a Wada test or fMRI should be performed.
术前评估项目中也包含语言评估，由术中辅助皮层定位的神经生理团队进行。	Preoperative assessment also included language assessment by the surgical neurophysiology team that will be assisting with stimulation mapping during the surgery.
团队需提前告知患者清醒状态下手术及完成定位的步骤与过程。	The patient is counseled about the process of an awake surgery and mapping ahead of time.
术中语言测试所用的图像与词语应从术前评估时患者能命名或口述的内容中选取。	Intraoperative testing employed images and words that the patient was able to name or read during preoperative evaluation.
术者对大脑皮质功能区解剖结构的了解可帮助其对肿瘤所在区域的功能进行预判。	An understanding of cortical functional anatomy is beneficial in estimating the location of function with respect to the tumor.
图4. 图示左侧半球与语言、感觉、运动功能相关的皮层解剖（上图）。	Figure 4: Left hemisphere and cortical anatomy related to language and sensorimotor function are shown (upper image).
经典的语言功能皮层区已被标记出来。	The classic cortical sites for language function are marked.
Broca区位于额下回的后方。	Broca’s area lies in the posterior aspect of the inferior frontal gyrus.
Wenicke区包含了左侧颞-顶叶皮质位于外侧裂周围的脑区。	Wernicke’s area includes the perisylvian region in the left temporoparietal cortices.
注意有一脑回（红色箭头处）连接中央前后与中央后回，所以感觉运动皮层并不直接开口于外侧裂。（上图由AL Rhoton, Jr教授授权）	Note that there is a gyral bridge (red arrow) between the precentral and postcentral gyri so the sensorimotor cortices do not directly open into the Sylvian fissure (Upper image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
M型记号（下图）标记了Broca区，在术前影像学上需标记该区，从而判断肿瘤侵犯范围以及是否需要实施唤醒麻醉手术。	The M-sign (lower image) signifies Broca’s area and should be identified on preoperative imaging to determine its involvement with the tumor and the need for an awake surgery.
“M”型脑回见于矢状位序列，由额下回眶部、额下回三角部、额下回盖部组成（下图）。	The “M” can be identified on sagittal sequences as an M-shaped gyrus formed by the pars orbitalis, triangularis, and opercularis (lower image).
87~89%的患者语言的运动或表达成分位于这个区域内。	This region contains the motor or expressive component of speech in 87-89% of patients.
皮质语言中枢（语言的理解或接受能力）的具体位置差异巨大。	The locations of the cortical language centers (comprehension or receptive speech) are incredibly variable.
事实上，倘若单纯使用标准解剖标志（如优势半球颞叶前4cm）来指导切除术，将会导致术后语言功能损伤。	In fact, the resections guided by purely standard anatomic landmarks (ie anterior 4 cm of the dominant temporal lobe) have led to postoperative language deficits.
先天性或长期存在的良性病灶如脑动静脉畸形（AVMs），皮质发育不良以及一些低级别胶质瘤（LGGs）可以改变或转移大脑皮层功能分布。	Congenital and long-standing benign lesions such as AVMs, cortical dyplasias and some LGGs can alter or transfer the distribution of cortical function.
此现象为切除本不宜手术的肿瘤及病灶提供了可能。	This phenomenon provides an excellent opportunity for aggressive excision of tumors and lesions otherwise deemed inoperable.
皮层语言功能区相关的胶质瘤切除策略与技巧	AWAKE MAPPING FOR RESECTION OF GLIOMAS ASSOCIATED WITH SPEECH CORTICES
神经外科麻醉	Neuroanesthesia
采用合适的麻醉方式，使患者处于舒适状态有助于唤醒麻醉开颅术成功实施。	Suitable neuroanesthesia aimed at keeping the patient comfortable is critical for success of an awake craniotomy.
通常，清醒阶段有两种麻醉方式：	Two methods may be used to accomplish anesthesia for awake procedures.
一些术者偏好使患者在整个手术阶段均处于相对清醒状态，	Some surgeons prefer the patient to be relatively awake during the entire procedure.
另一些术者则倾向于患者仅在定位及肿瘤切除阶段清醒。	Others prefer that the patient be awake only for the mapping and resection stages.
过深的镇静将导致患者意识混乱，从而影响合作。	Deeper levels of conscious sedation can lead to patients’ confusion and compromise his or her cooperation.
笔者个人偏向于在开关颅时使患者进入深度镇静状态，而在皮质定位阶段处于轻度镇静状态。	I prefer to keep the patient heavily consciously sedated during exposure (craniotomy) and closure but only minimally sedated during the mapping stages.
术中，患者必须在清醒情况下保持冷静。	The patient must be kept calm, but awake.
药物会降低术中语言功能测试的可靠程度，但紧张、高血压以及憋气动作（Valsalva event）可能在颅骨缺损的情况下引起颅压升高，增加脑组织疝出的风险。	Premedication may decrease the reliability of language testing during the procedure, but anxiety, hypertension, and Valsalva events may increase cerebral tension and herniation through the craniotomy defect.
通常，使用咪达唑仑（Versed）、丙泊酚（Diprivan）与芬太尼等药物来维持镇静催眠状态。	Typically, premedication is accomplished through midazolam (Versed) and propofol (Diprivan) as well as fentanyl to maintain a sedated hypnotic state.
放置头架时，在钻孔处注射局麻药后，可单次快注瑞芬太尼（Ultiva）。	During skull clamp placement, remifentanil (Ultiva) boluses may be used after injection of a generous amount of local anesthetic at the pin sites.
在皮层定位完成后，右旋美托咪定（Precedex）与瑞芬太尼仍需持续使用直到手术结束。	After mapping is completed, sedation with dexmedetomidine (Precedex) and remifentanil is maintained until the conclusion of surgery.
丙泊酚（100 mg/kg/min）与瑞芬太尼（0.07-20 mg/kg/hr）联合运用维持镇静。	Sedation is reached using propofol (up to100 mg/kg/min) and remifentanil (0.07–2.0 mg/kg/hr).
不能耐受丙泊酚（导致呼吸暂停）的患者可予以右旋美托咪定（1 mg/kg/min）。	Patients who do not tolerate propofol (causing apnea) may be given dexmedetomidine (up to1 mg/kg/min).
患者需使用Foley导尿管与甘露醇。	A Foley catheter is inserted and mannitol is administered.
患者体位与开颅	Patient Positioning and Craniotomy
患者舒适是保证手术平稳进行的首要条件。	Patient comfort is paramount to maintain control over the flow of the operation.
术中，应权衡利弊，既考虑患者体位的舒适度，又考虑该体位是否有利于医生安全进行手术。	There must be a compromise between the position required for the surgeon to safely conduct the operation and the position that delivers the most comfort to the patient.
而往往前者更为重要，因为这决定了患者对手术的耐受度。	Ultimately, the latter is more important since it determines the patient’s tolerance for the procedure.
当旋转患者头部或使其颈部伸展时，必须避免患者颈部不适感并保证患者可舒适吞咽。	The head rotation and extension must be adjusted to avoid neck discomfort while allowing the patient to swallow comfortably.
如果患者曾有腰背痛，那么可将枕头放置在其膝盖和/或腰背部。	If the patient has a history of back pain, pillows must be placed under the knees and/or the back.
所有受压点均需垫软垫。	All pressure points must be very well padded.
患者可以使用加温毯，从而减少患者寒颤的发生，降低显微镜下手术部位的偏移。	A warming blanket may be used to minimize shivering and movement of the operative target during microsurgery.
同步手术视野的显示器需放置在患者视线外。	Video monitors displaying the operative field are turned away from the patient’s line of sight.
尽管多数患者术时采用仰卧位，但在少数情况下笔者会使用侧卧位避免患者颈部过于扭转。	Although most patients are placed in a supine position, there are rare circumstances when I use a lateral position to avoid significant patient’s neck torsion.
当病灶位于Wernicke区后部或位于感觉运动皮层时可考虑运用此体位。	Lesions in the posterior aspect of the Wernicke’s or the sensorimotor cortices may be candidates for such a setup.
最后，术前谈话需告知病人手术的各个步骤，患者保持放松冷静配合我们才可以共渡难关。	Ultimately, appropriate communication with the patient about every step of the operation is necessary to keep the patient relaxed and in control during these stressful moments.
图5.  图示切除临近语言皮层的肿瘤时患者体位摆放和皮瓣、骨瓣设计。	Figure 5: Positioning, scalp, and bone flap design for tumors adjacent to the speech cortices.
该肿瘤比邻Broca区并向后蔓延至运动皮层附近。	The tumor lies adjacent to the Broca’s area and extends posteriorly near the motor cortex.
设计的骨瓣需能暴露所有需要定位的语言皮层，也需要暴露肿瘤及功能皮层周围至少2cm的皮质。	The bone flap is designed to encompass all the eloquent regions to be mapped. It should expose at least 2 cm of the cortex around the perimeter of the tumor and the functional cortices.
在定位数据的引导下可行肿瘤切除术，切除范围需与功能皮层至少保持1cm的距离（下图）。	Resection is guided based on mapping data and is conducted at least 1cm away from the nearby functional cortex (bottom illustration).
图6. 放置头架前，笔者使用头皮局部麻醉来阻滞支配同侧头皮的主要神经干。	Figure 6: I use local and regional scalp anesthesia/block generously before placement of the skull clamp. The major nerve trunks supplying the ipsilateral scalp are blocked.
运用适量局麻药（0.5%利多卡因与0.25%麻卡因），我阻滞了滑车上神经、眶上神经、耳颞神经、枕大神经和枕小神经。	Using generous amounts of local anesthetic (lidocaine 0.5% and Marcaine 0.25%,) I block the supratrochlear, supraorbital, auriculotemporal, and greater and lesser occipital nerves.
局麻药的注射点如图红色箭头所示（右图）。	The sites of injection for the regional scalp block are marked in red arrows (right lower image).
局麻药也被注射于切口线及钻颅骨钉处，在此过程中，可使用右旋美托咪定使患者保持镇静。	A copious amount of local anesthetic is also used along the planned line of incision and pin sites. The patient may also be sedated using dexmedetomidine throughout this process.
开颅将暴露较大范围的皮质。	The craniotomy exposes a wide area of cortex.
为增加患者舒适度，颞肌部位将再次行神经阻滞。	The temporalis muscle is repeatedly blocked for patient comfort.
根据肿瘤边界和临近需行定位的皮层决定暴露脑组织的范围。	The surrounding brain should be exposed around the perimeter of the tumor and the adjacent cortices undergoing mapping.
在抬起骨瓣前，可从颅骨钻孔中注入局麻药物至硬膜外隙。	Before the bone flap is elevated, local anesthetic is injected through the burr holes to irrigate the epidural space.
这是因为硬脑膜受丰富的神经支配，此举可减轻疼痛。	This maneuver can potentially decrease the significant pain caused by dissecting the well-innervated and sensitive dura during the elevation of the bone flap.
当取出骨瓣后，脑膜中动脉附近的硬脑膜需要阻滞。	Once the bone flap is elevated, the dura should be blocked around the middle meningeal artery.
在做这些操作前，需告知患者。	The patient should be warned in advance of these maneuvers.
使用咬骨钳的颞下开颅术应尽量避免，因为在此类手术中，患者将非常疼痛。	A subtemporal craniectomy using bone rongeurs should be avoided because this method can be very painful.
在骨瓣取出、硬脑膜打开后，停用所有镇静药，使患者保持清醒状态准备皮层刺激。	Upon elevation of the bone flap, all sedative medications are stopped to allow the patient to awaken and be ready for cortical stimulation while the dural opening is completed.
可抬高患者头部促进静脉回流、辅助放松大脑。	The head of the patient is raised to facilitate venous drainage and assist with cerebral relaxation.
定位技术	Mapping Technique
在实施电刺激前，需准备冰的林格氏液，以备快速终止可能的癫痫发作。	Before any stimulation takes place, iced Ringer’s solution should be immediately available to help with a rapid cessation of seizures, if necessary.
对于皮层刺激导致的癫痫，冰林格氏液非常有效，因为它不像其他需要静脉给药的药物可能导致患者无法继续配合定位操作。	Use of ice-cold irrigation is quite effective in seizure cessation induced by cortical stimulation, obviating a need to use intravenous agents that can complicate patient’s cooperation for mapping.
长时间的全身性发作可能影响患者通气，如果冰盐水无法快速终止发作，可使用美索比妥（Brevital）。	Prolonged generalized seizures can place the patient’s airway at risk while the head is turned and held in the skull clamp. Methohexital (Brevital) can be used if cold saline is not immediately interrupting seizure activity.
在清醒状态下，可使用Ojemann刺激器，初始刺激强度1.5mA，随后每次增加1-2 mA（一般最高刺激强度为10mA，偶尔可超过）。	Under awake conditions, stimulation may start at 1.5 mA and increase in 1-2 mA increments (maximum of 10 mA or occasionally more) using the Ojemann stimulator.
刺激器设置为双向方波（每相1.25ms）模式，以60Hz频率持续刺激4秒。	The generator should be set to deliver biphasic square wave pulses (1.25 ms per phase) in 4-second trains at 60 Hz.
首先标记脸部功能区皮层，接着是临近前Broca区及后Wernicke区的皮质。	First, the face area is identified, and then the adjacent anterior Broca’s and posterior Wernicke’s cortices are mapped.
按此顺序可以避免因潜在的功能区重叠而带来的困惑。	This sequence is important to avoid confusion regarding overlapping areas containing potentially more than one function.
每个区域刺激2-3s，每个任务间隔4-10s。	Stimulation is applied for 2-3 seconds at each site with tasks separated by 4–10 seconds.
向患者出示幻灯片，记录阳性或阴性结果以及语言功能障碍的类型，并向全手术团队告知。	Each slide is presented to the patient, the results are recorded as positive or negative, and the type of language disturbance is announced to the entire team.
双极刺激电极尖端直径1mm，两极相距5mm。	The bipolar electrode tips should be 1 mm in diameter and separated by 5 mm.
每个皮层区域重复刺激三次确保准确及可重复性。	Each cortical site is checked three times to ensure accuracy and reproducibility.
当评估Wernicke区时，幻灯依旧以4秒/张的频率展示，检验患者命名能力。	While the Wernicke’s area (posterior language site-language speech) is evaluated, the slides are also presented every 4 seconds to test naming.
在患者看到图片前一瞬予以刺激。	Stimulation is applied just before the patient looks at the picture.
当定位Broca区时，要求患者从1数到20。	While the Broca’s area (anterior language site-motor speech) is being identified, the patient is asked to count from 1 to 20.
Broca区的刺激会导致患者言语中止，而无任何口咽部活动。	Stimulation of Broca’s area will cause speech arrest without any movement in the oropharynx.
上述的方法可将阴性和阳性的区域均标记出。而近期研究数据显示在小范围开颅时用仅定位没有功能的“阴性”区域（negative mapping）指导肿瘤切除也是安全的。	Although both negative and positive sites are marked, recent data have demonstrated the safety of limited craniotomies and cortical mapping to find “negative” locations without any function for identifying safe areas for resection (negative mapping).
在行“无功能区定位“时，笔者首先确定最大安全刺激参数。	For negative mapping, I first determine the maximal safe stimulation parameters.
为此，笔者首先增加刺激强度直到出现“后发放电位”（afterdischarge potentials），然后降低刺激强度直到不再引出后发放电位。	To do so, I increase stimulation until afterdischarge potentials are encountered, then, the stimulation is decreased so that no such potential is again elicited.
最后使用这些参数来标记无功能区，从而在安全范围内切除肿瘤。	I use these stimulation settings to perform negative mapping and resect tumor in the safe areas.
阴性区的标记结果有赖于多种变量，也需要考虑解剖学因素。	The results of negative mapping are based on multiple factors and anatomical considerations are also decisive.
图7. 图示左侧颞叶开颅术时正使用的语言皮层定位技术。	Figure 7: Mapping technique for language is demonstrated through a left temporal craniotomy.
运用硬膜下条状电极可观察皮层脑电图，并持续监测后发放电位。	The subdural strip performs continuous electrocorticography and monitors for afterdischarge potentials.
若出现后发放电位（ADs，afterdischarges），则表明当前刺激强度过高，已扩布出目标皮层，因此该刺激导致的反应并不可靠。	The presence of after-discharges confirms that the stimulus/current is too high and is spreading beyond the target cortex; this finding renders the stimulation response unreliable.
皮层处每个位置均需重复测定三次来确保精确。	Each cortical site is checked three times to ensure accuracy.
每张幻灯放映4秒以供患者命名。	The slides are presented every 4 seconds for naming.
患者看到图片前的一瞬予以皮层区域刺激。	The stimulus should be delivered to the cortex just before the patient glances at the picture.
若患者出现停顿，则将该区域贴上标签。	Sites that induce speech arrest are tagged with labeled tickets.
从患者口唇或口咽运动即可辨别单纯的言语中止与构音障碍，这些对患者语言功能非常重要，需要保留。	Although pure speech arrest and dysarthria can be distinguished by identifying mouth or oropharyngeal movements, both are important for speech function and should be preserved.
图8. 上图示颞叶后下部肿瘤切除术。	Figure 8: Tumor resection within the posteroinferior temporal lobe is illustrated.
由于语言功能区皮质下的白质较难识别或定位，切除过程中可能存在意外损伤，故一旦肿瘤切除开始，就可对语言功能区进行持续监测。	Once tumor resection begins, language exams are performed continuously because the subcortical white matter involved in language function is difficult to map/identify and a real risk of inadvertent injury during tumor resection exists.
切除边界需与功能区保持1cm的安全距离。	Resection borders should respect a 1cm safety margin around the functional tissue.
这个距离可改善术前就存在的语言缺陷，也可缩短术后语言功能障碍的持续时间。	This distance has been shown to improve preoperative language deficits, as well as the duration and permanence of postoperative language dysfunction.
但在极个别手术中，确保患者处于有效监测后，笔者曾违背这项原则，进行距离功能区边界小于1cm的切除。	I have occasionally violated this rule as long as the patient’s exam is carefully and frequently monitored during this portion of the resection.
图9. 颅底硬脑膜与大脑镰非常敏感，所以必须减少牵拉及双极止血从而避免患者的明显不适。	Figure 9: The dura over the skull base and falx cerebri are very sensitive and their manipulation and bipolar coagulation should be minimized to avoid significant discomfort to the patient.
这些敏感区域的神经分布如上图所示。	The innervation to these sensitive areas is marked.
病例示例	Case Examples
病例1：一名年轻患者因癫痫全身发作就诊，诊断额叶后部巨大低级别胶质瘤。	Case 1: A young patient presented with a generalized seizure and was diagnosed with a large posterior frontal low-grade glioma.
图10. 图示术前MRI与术中定位（第一行图片）。	Figure 10: The preoperative MRI and intraoperative map are demonstrated (upper row).
对运动性语言功能区（Lm），语言接受能力区（Lr），脸（Fa）和手（Ha）区的定位为进一步安全切除肿瘤保驾护航。	Localization of the motor speech (Lm), receptive language (Lr), Face (Fa) and hand (Ha) areas allows safe and aggressive resection of the tumor.
肿瘤边界如黑色缝线所示。	The boundaries of the tumor are marked with a black suture.
肿瘤深部可采用皮层下定位。	Subcortical mapping may be used at the depth of the tumor.
笔者将皮层刺激的参数调高1-2mA用以实施皮层下定位。	I increase the cortical stimulation parameters by 1-2 mA to conduct subcortical mapping.
在切除术中，当处理关键皮层及传导束附近区域时，需频繁进行术中监测评估患者状态。	During resection within close vicinity of vital cortices and tracts, frequent intraoperative exams are performed to assess the status of the patient.
这种及时反馈对术者意义非凡，并鼓励术者在刺激定位数据引导下进一步切除肿瘤。	This immediate feedback is important to the surgeon and encourages further resection as guided by stimulation mapping data.
术后影像学示对肿瘤进行了适当的切除（第二行图片），患者未出现任何功能损害。	Postoperative imaging demonstrates a reasonable resection of the mass (lower row). This patient did not suffer from the any deficit.
病例2：另一名年轻患者因癫痫就诊，后诊断为左侧颞叶肿瘤。	Case 2: Another young patient presented with a seizure and was diagnosed with a left temporal tumor.
图11. 位于左侧颞叶语言皮层附近的低级别胶质瘤。	Figure 11: A left temporal low-grade glioma is located in the vicinity of the language cortices.
肿瘤导致脑回轻微扩张，术中皮层定位标记了仅稍位于脑回前上方的语言（Lr）和面部（Fa）区域（上图）。	The intraoperative map demonstrates the location of the language (Lr) and face (Fa) regions just anterior and superior to the gyri slightly expanded by the tumor (top images).
在连续的术中监测下，肿瘤完全切除（下图）。	Gross total resection was accomplished as guided by continuous intraoperative exams (bottom images).
不论正被定位的区域是何种功能，笔者在术中均会频繁使用神经监测来指导手术切除方案。	Regardless of the function of the region that is being mapped, I use frequent intraoperative neurological exams to guide my resection strategies.
一旦有任何轻微的功能受损，笔者就会改变方案，并/或停止接下来的切除操作。	Development of any slight deficit will alter my plan and/or stop further resection maneuvers.
由于皮层定位过程耗时相对较长，且手术消毒铺巾由于患者的清醒状态受到一定限制，故术后常规运用48h抗生素防止感染。	Antibiotics are used for 48 hours after surgery due to the relative long duration of these mapping procedures and the limitations on sterile draping of the surgical field related to awake procedures.
术前无癫痫史患者术后运用7天抗惊厥药，并且术后48h内需完善术后影像学检查。	Anticonvulsant drugs are administered for 7 days in patients without perioperative seizures, and postoperative imaging is performed within 48 hours.
因患者实施的手术与功能区皮层相关，具有较高的癫痫风险，可推荐使用超常规剂量的抗惊厥药治疗。	Supratherapeutic levels of anticonvulsant medications are advised due to the high risk of seizures in patients who undergo surgery of the functional cortices.
这是因为癫痫既延迟了神经恢复，又常令患者家属紧张情绪不佳。	Seizures delay neurologic recovery and are very disheartening to the patient’s family.
类固醇需逐渐减量，特别对于那些需要言语治疗的患者而言。	The steroids are tapered slowly, especially if speech therapy is required.
患者术后常会存在短暂的语言功能缺陷。	The risk of temporary postoperative deficits in language function is significant.
倘若手术结束时患者语言功能完好或仅轻微受累，但术后第一天受损加重，那该患者日后完全康复的希望非常可观。	If the patient’s language is intact or mildly compromised by the end of the operation, but worsens on the first postoperative day, the opportunity for meaningful recovery is substantial.
反之，若手术结束时语言功能显著退步，则通常预示着不可逆性缺血损伤。	However, a significant decline at the end of the operation usually signifies an irreversible ischemic injury.
术后第一日神经功能退化的最常见原因是癫痫亚临床发作。	The most common reason for neurologic decline on the first postoperative day is subclinical seizures.
· 清醒开颅术的成功实施有赖于病人的严格筛选。	Patient selection is critical to the success of an awake operation.
紧张、不合作的患者会显著增加术中风险。	Anxious and uncooperative patients significantly increase the risks of the procedure.
· 病人的舒适度与麻醉的有效性是重中之重。	The importance of patient’s comfort and effective anesthesia cannot be overemphasized.
· 定位语言皮层与肿瘤切除操作中，术者必须谨慎高效。	The surgeon must be efficient and meticulous in mapping the eloquent cortex and expedient in performing the resection.
大部分患者都在忍受着清醒状态的各种不适，哪怕最配合最有忍耐力的患者在长达4小时的清醒开颅术后都会不耐烦、不合作。	Most patients are tolerant of awake conditions, but even the most resilient patients become inpatient and uncooperative after 4 hours of awake surgery.
· 一次成功的清醒开颅术依赖于团队合作。	An awake procedure is truly a team effort.
手术医生必须与麻醉医生、语言治疗师、患者均有良好的沟通交流。	The surgeon must constantly communicate with the anesthesiologist, speech pathologist, and the patient.
岛叶肿瘤	Insular Tumors
岛叶在调节内脏感觉运动、控制心血管交感活性、传入躯体感觉中均起重要作用。	The insula plays an important role in visceral sensorimotor processing, sympathetic control of cardiovascular tone and somatosensory input.
它也参与了痛觉的传递、运动规划、自主性吞咽、味觉、听觉、前庭功能、情绪、认知能力和语言能力。	It also participates in pain processing, motor planning, volitional swallowing, and gustatory, auditory, vestibular, emotional, and cognitive functions, including language.
更多关于岛叶功能的信息请参考维基百科（Wikipedia）。	For further information regarding the complex functions of insula, please see Wikipedia.
与其他部位的胶质瘤相比，岛叶胶质瘤在临床表现与生物学行为上比较特殊。	Compared with other gliomas, insular gliomas are unique in their presentation and behavior.
这些肿瘤常起源于古皮层（allocortex）或中皮层（mesocortex）附近的白质。	These tumors usually arise in areas of white matter adjacent to the allocortex or mesocortex.
在它们生长的初级阶段，常累及新皮层（neocortices）、中央核及脑室。	During their initial phases of growth, these tumors frequently respect the neocortices, central nuclei, and ventricles.
因为岛叶解剖结构复杂，并覆盖有高级语言皮层、白质束及重要的血管结构，故岛叶部位的手术难度极大。	The insula is a challenging structure to reach surgically because of its complex anatomy and the overlying highly eloquent cortices and white matter tracts, as well as critical vascular structures.
随着显微外科、唤醒麻醉下皮层（及皮层下）定位、全身麻醉技术的进展，安全实施岛叶手术成为了可能。	The development of microsurgical techniques and implementation of cortical and subcortical mapping strategies under conscious sedation (awake) and general anesthesia (sleep) have advanced the safety of insular surgery.
旁边缘系统区域（paralimbic region）素来是胶质瘤的好发部位，岛叶就包括其中。	The paralimbic region, including the insular lobe, is a common location for gliomas.
25%的低级别胶质瘤与10%的高级别胶质瘤发生在此区域。	Up to 25% of low-grade and 10% of high-grade gliomas are found in this region.
岛叶胶质瘤的临床表现与它们的级别相关。	The clinical presentation of insular gliomas is somewhat associated with their grade.
低级别胶质瘤即使长到很大体积也可能只引起轻微临床症状。	Low-grade gliomas can grow to a very large size while causing minimal symptoms.
最常见的临床表现是新发癫痫。	Their most common presentation is new onset seizures.
岛叶癫痫的不同症状反映了其复杂的功能解剖。	The semiology of insular epilepsy reflects its complex functional anatomy.
它可能类似于颞叶癫痫或起源于额叶的夜间过度运动性发作（nocturnal hypermotor epilepsy）。	It may mimic temporal lobe epilepsy or nocturnal hypermotor epilepsy of frontal lobe origin.
但以单纯部分发作最为常见，并伴随呼吸、内脏感觉、口消化道症状，可有面部感觉异常、喉头肌肉痉挛狭窄、味幻觉、发作后面瘫伴多涎、听幻觉及感觉性失语等等。	Simple partial seizures are common, with features such as respiratory, viscerosensitive, or oroalimentary symptoms, facial paresthesias, laryngeal constriction, gustatory illusions, hypersalivation with postictal facial paresis, auditory hallucinations, or sensory aphasia.
由于岛叶胶质瘤早期缺乏临床症状，因此发现时肿瘤往往已经长到较大体积，而患者常没有明显神经功能缺陷或仅有非特异性症状，如头痛乏力、轻度语言障碍及行为改变。	Because of the paucity of symptoms in their early stages, these tumors can reach an impressive size, while the patient has no apparent neurologic deficit and only unspecific symptoms such as headaches, fatigue, subtle speech difficulties, and behavioral changes.
高级别胶质瘤则常导致周围血管源性脑水肿及组织浸润，造成局部及所处半球的占位效应，伴随感觉、运动及语言障碍。	High-grade gliomas frequently cause surrounding vasogenic edema with tissue infiltration, resulting in local and hemispheric mass effect as well as sensorimotor and language deficits.
在大多数情况下，神经生理学评估可发现患者的认知能力减退，这常与局部脑水肿或癫痫灶相关。	In most cases, neuropsychological assessment reveals a cognitive decline, most likely as a result of regional edema or seizures.
MRI的T2及FLAIR序列对肿瘤浸润边界的勾画最为清楚。肿瘤可局限在岛叶，也可到达外侧裂周围、岛盖部，及其他旁边缘系统区域，即眶额部及颞极区。	Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences best delineates the extent of tumor infiltration, which can be limited to the insular lobe or reach the perisylvian opercula and other paralimbic areas, namely the orbitofrontal and temporopolar territories.
肿瘤的浸润程度影响其可切除性。	Diffuseness of the tumor affects its resectability.
功能性磁共振成像（fMRI）与脑磁图（MEG）可以帮助确定语言、听觉、感觉及运动的功能区。	Functional MRI (fMRI) and magnetoencephalography can help define the overlying cortical distribution of language, auditory, sensory, and motor function.
弥散张量成像（DTI）与纤维束成像（tractography）可描记岛叶附近的重要传导束。	Diffusion tensor imaging and tractography delineate the underlying major tracts surrounding the insula.
皮层及皮层下解剖及功能区的3D成像则为手术方案提供了极大参考价值。	Merging three-dimensional cortical and subcortical anatomic functional maps provides highly relevant information for surgical planning.
上述技术辅以术中皮层及皮层下电刺激所得数据，即可规划合理的手术路径，在保护大脑功能的情况下最大限度切除肿瘤。	All of this information is supplemented by intraoperative cortical and subcortical stimulation data in order to create adequate operative trajectory to maximize tumor removal while preserving function.
组织学上高级别的肿瘤在影像学上常有结节状强化。	Tumors with higher grade histology often exhibit nodular or global contrast enhancement.
对于增强区域需引起高度重视，笔者常常在术中对这些区域行病理活检，以此保证肿瘤分级的可靠性。	Careful attention must be paid to the enhancing areas so that they are biopsied during surgery to permit appropriate tumor grading.
图1：第一行图像展示了两种不同类型的低级别岛叶胶质瘤，它们的边界具有不同的浸润程度。	Figure 1: These images in the top row show two different patterns of insular low-grade gliomas. The upper images show the different degrees of diffuseness for tumor margins.
对于浸润生长的岛叶肿瘤，完全切除风险大且极具挑战。	Adequate resection of diffuse insular tumors can be very challenging and risky.
功能性磁共振成像（fMRI）与弥散张量成像（DTI）的纤维跟踪技术可以估计功能性皮质及白质束的侵犯程度（下图）。	Functional MRI (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging with fiber tracking can estimate the degree of involvement of the functional cortices and white matter tracts (lower images).
左下图高亮显示的是位于肿瘤上部的运动语言区。	In the left lower image, the motor speech area overlying the tumor is highlighted.
对于体积较大的肿瘤，术中定位及fMRI数据可以指引术者通过安全的路径到达并暴露肿瘤。	Along with intraoperative mapping data, the fMRI information can guide the surgeon in creating safe transcortical corridors to achieve adequate tumor exposure in large tumors.
过去，岛叶肿瘤主要采用保守治疗，仅当肿瘤的明显占位效应及水肿造成患者神经功能缺陷时才考虑手术。	In the past, insular gliomas were traditionally managed conservatively and debulking surgery was performed only in patients with neurologic deficits secondary to significant mass effect or edema.
然而，显微外科以及定位技术的发展提高了手术的安全性，于是适应症得以扩展，术前无明确神经功能障碍的患者也可以考虑手术。	However, advances in microsurgical and mapping strategies have now improved the safety of resection and have expanded the indications for patients without preoperative dense neurological deficits.
如今对低级别胶质瘤自然病程理解日益加深，尽管肿瘤初期的亚临床浸润并不活跃，但持续增生及发生恶性变的风险很高，因此手术指证也随之扩展。	More recently, the operative paradigm has broadened with a better understanding of the natural history of low-grade gliomas. Despite their initially indolent subclinical infiltration, continuous tumor growth and malignant transformation of these tumors is highly likely.
虽然缺乏I类证据，但近期一些研究认为手术是提高总生存期、无进展生存期，降低恶性变的主要因素之一。	Despite the lack of Class I evidence, several recent studies support the role of the extent of resection as one of the main prognostic factors in overall survival, progression-free survival and malignant transformation.
最大限度切除肿瘤的同时保证神经功能受损最小是岛叶胶质瘤手术的目标。	Maximal tumor resection, while minimizing neurologic deficits, should be the goal in insular glioma surgery.
另外，前人在切除术中积累的经验已经证实岛叶区域具有高度的功能可塑性。	Furthermore, accumulated experience with resection of these tumors has proven that there is significant functional plasticity in this region of the brain.
只要保证在术中皮层及皮层下刺激定位的引导下，基本的语言及运动区域不受损伤，这种可塑性可以使大多数患者在岛叶肿瘤切除术之后一段时间内代偿、恢复功能。	This plasticity allows most patients to compensate and recover over time after aggressive insular resection, as long as the essential language and motor areas identified by intraoperative cortical and subcortical stimulation mapping were preserved.
肿瘤切除不仅能提高患者的生存期，降低恶性变概率，也被证实可以提高岛叶肿瘤常见并发的难治癫痫患者的生存质量。	In addition to its oncological impact on patient survival and malignant transformation, tumor resection has also proven valuable for advancing the quality of life in patients who present with intractable epilepsy, a very common occurrence with these tumors.
笔者对岛叶胶质瘤的处理方案是：对于低级别肿瘤，运用显微外科、定位技术通过外科学方法切除。	My algorithmic approach to insular gliomas involves surgical resection of suspected low-grade tumors using microsurgical and mapping techniques.
而对于高级别肿瘤，笔者则偏向保守方案。	However, I approach insular high-grade tumors more conservatively.
笔者相信即使运用目前最新的技术手段切除岛叶胶质母细胞瘤（尤其是位于内侧的肿瘤）依然有巨大风险。	I believe the risks associated with the resection of insular glioblastoma (especially medially located tumors) is significant despite the use of our current techniques.
除非患者年轻、该岛叶高级别肿瘤严重影响患者功能、并位于非优势半球岛叶外侧区域，否则对于该类手术需慎重考虑。	Unless a high-grade tumor is located along the lateral aspect of the nondominant insula in a young highly functional patient, judicious use of an aggressive operative strategy for insular glioblastoma is advised.
不论在术中皮层定位时选用唤醒麻醉（患者“清醒”）还是全麻（患者“睡眠”状态），在术前首先需确定患者的优势半球位于哪一侧。	Hemisphere dominance must be established before deciding on resection using conscious sedation or “awake” versus general anesthesia or “sleep” stimulation mapping.
对于左利手患者可以通过fMRI确认他们言语的优势半球。	Left-handed patients should have their speech dominance confirmed via fMRI.
当肿瘤广泛累及额叶时，单纯经外侧裂入路常常切除中等或大型体积的肿瘤，此时切除部分额下回可增加操作空间，得以切除肿瘤的上极和前极。	Patients with extensive frontal extension of their tumor should undergo an fMRI to guide speech mapping in expectation of an inferior frontal partial gyrectomy to increase the working space to remove the superior and anterior poles of the tumor.
术前应使用fMRI技术帮助定位语言区。	The transsylvian operative corridor is usually not adequate for removing moderate to large size lesions.
无论岛叶肿瘤是否位于优势半球，笔者都倾向于唤醒麻醉下实施手术。	I prefer to resect both dominant and nondominant insular tumors under awake conditions.
没有麻醉药物的影响，得以更精确更高效的定位功能皮层及白质纤维束。	This method allows more precise and efficient mapping of the intimately involved functional cortices and the white matter tracts while mapping data is unaffected by anesthesia.
不仅于此，唤醒麻醉下，笔者可以相对而言更频繁地进行测试定位，这种即时的反馈可靠性高，特别有利于处理与内囊紧密相关的肿瘤的深部后内侧边界。	Moreover, I can examine the patient frequently, and this instant feedback is very assuring, especially during handling of the posteromedial deep margins of the tumor intimately associated with the internal capsule.
根据笔者的经验，患者即时、持续的反馈可以使笔者在避免不必要的神经损伤及患者不适的同时，进行更积极的手术切除。	In my experience, the patient’s continuous feedback has allowed me to conduct more aggressive resections without incurring additional neurologic morbidity or significant patient discomfort.
手术需要适当加速，因为大多数患者在四小时的清醒手术后就会丧失耐心。	The operation should be conducted expeditiously as the most cooperative patients lose their patience after about four hours of awake surgery.
也正因为此手术技术复杂、耗时长，大多数神经外科医生选择麻醉状态（不唤醒）进行定位。	Because of the technical complexity of this potentially lengthy operation, most colleagues opt to perform sleep mapping.
如果有定位需求，非优势半球的肿瘤可以在全麻下不唤醒行皮层定位，确保患者最大的舒适度和显微手术的安全性。	If necessary, non-dominant tumors may be managed under general anesthesia using sleep mapping techniques to maximize the patient’s comfort and safety of microsurgery.
这同样也适用于过分紧张焦虑的患者。	Anxious patients may also be candidates for this methodology.
如果为了暴露体积较大肿瘤必须切除部分额叶，使用定位技术可以保护下行运动传导通路及皮层面部功能区。	In these instances, mapping protects the descending motor pathways and cortical face area if inferior frontal resection is necessary to reach large tumors.
内侧豆纹动脉限定了切除范围能达到的最内侧边界。	The lateral lenticulostriate arteries determine the most medial extent of resection.
一些神外医生建议术前行血管造影精准定位这些重要的血管穿支。	Some operators recommend a preoperative angiogram to more precisely localize these important perforators.
笔者个人并不采取此方法，因为术中探查往往已经暴露了这些细小血管，可以充分保护。	I have not required this study because intraoperative inspection often exposes these fine vessels that can be carefully protected.
岛叶是大脑皮质的一部分，被额盖、顶盖、颞盖所覆盖。	The insular lobe is part of the cerebral cortex, and covered by the opercula of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes.
岛叶的三维结构呈一尖端向前下方的金字塔型，尖端称为岛顶（insular apex），其最表浅，距皮层表面9-16mm。	The three-dimensional structure of the insula constitutes a pyramid, and its apex is the most lateral and superficial point of the structure, located 9-16 mm from the cortical surface.
岛顶位于前侧裂点（anterior Sylvian point）深部，额下回三角部（pars triangularis）的下方。	The insular apex is beneath the anterior Sylvian point, just inferior to the vertex of the pars triangularis.
前侧裂点是侧裂池中最常用的标记，外侧裂分离由此开始。	The anterior Sylvian point is the most generous portion of the Sylvian cistern where the Sylvian split can begin.
岛叶皮质周围有一浅沟环绕，称为环岛沟（peri-insular sulci），可分为前环岛沟、上环岛沟及下环岛沟。	The insular cortex is circumscribed by the anterior, superior, and inferior peri-insular sulci.
上环岛沟与前环岛沟是重要的手术标志。	The superior and inferior peri-insular sulci are important surgical landmarks;
在手术早期暴露它们可保证充分的手术范围，即暴露了大部分岛叶外侧肿瘤的上下界。	exposure at their base early in surgery ensures an adequate operative reach to the inferior and superior borders of most lateral insular tumors.
图2：三角部尖处向上的自然回缩，形成了外侧裂池最为宽阔的部位（A）。	Figure 2: The natural upward retraction of the apex of the pars triangularis leads to the widest section of the Sylvian cistern (A).
切除额盖、颞盖后如图（B）。	The lower and upper portions of the frontal and temporal opercula have been removed (B).
岛中央沟走行几乎与中央沟平行。	The central insular sulcus courses superficial to, and almost parallel with, the central sulcus on the convexity.
移除剩余的额顶盖部（C）。	The remaining part of the frontoparietal operculum has been removed (C).
岛叶部分放大后，可见前界沟（anterior limiting sulcus）向上向前延伸，组成岛叶的前界（D）。	The anterior limiting sulcus is directed upward and anteriorly to form the anterior border of the insula. Enlarged view of the insula (D).
沿上下界沟横切移除额顶盖、颞盖及大脑半球脑核（central core）浅面的结构后，暴露岛叶与其深部结构的关系。	The frontoparietal and temporal opercula and the upper portions of the central core of the hemisphere have been removed using transverse cuts that extend along the superior and inferior limiting sulcus to show the relationship between the insula and the deeper structures.
大脑半球脑核（包含尾状核、豆状核、丘脑、内囊）位于岛叶的深部。	The central core of the hemisphere, which contains the caudate and lentiform nuclei, thalamus, and internal capsule, is located deep in the insula.
该标本上外侧区域放大后如图（F）所示，其展示了深部白质的解剖结构。	Enlarged superolateral view of the same specimen is shown in image F to depict the anatomy of deep white matter structures.
Limen Ins = Limen insula，岛阈。（图像由AL Rhoton,Jr 授权）	Limen Ins = limen insula (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
岛叶皮质的脑沟回解剖已在图 2中阐明。	The sulcal-gyral anatomy of the insular cortex is detailed in Figure 2.
岛叶有两处重要解剖标志，一为岛叶干（insular stem），其为岛叶的前基底部，位于近外侧裂的深部。二为岛阈，位于岛叶干中。	Two important anatomic landmarks of the insular lobe are the insular stem, which is the anterobasal portion of the insula located in the depth of the proximal Sylvian fissure, and the limen insula, located within the insular stem.
在岛叶内侧深部有一些重要结构，如最外囊（extreme capsule）、屏状核（claustrum）、外囊（external capsule）、纹状体（striatum）。	Located medially and deep to the insula are several critical structures. The extreme capsule, claustrum, external capsule, and striatum are located deep to the central portion of the insula.
运动皮层纤维在内囊后肢汇集，并立即深入上环岛沟后段。	The fibers of the motor cortex converging into the posterior limb of the internal capsule run immediately deep to the posterior segment of the superior peri-insular sulcus.
钩束（uncinate fasciculus）沿上环岛沟前部的内侧走行。	The uncinate fasciculus runs medial to the anterior portion of the superior peri-insular sulcus.
图 3：岛叶主要接受M2段的分支血供。	Figure 3: The arteries of the insula originate from the M2 segment.
岛盖动脉或长穿支动脉（箭头）供应岛叶及岛盖的血供。	The insulo-opercular or long perforating arteries (arrows) supply the insula and operculum.
缩写：alg = 前岛长回（anterior long insular gyrus）；asg = 前岛短回（anterior short insular gyrus）；cis = 岛中央沟（central insular sulcus）；ia = 岛顶（insular apex）；it = M2下干（inferior trunk of M2）；msg = 中岛短回（middle short insular gyrus）；P2 = 大脑后动脉环池段（ambient segment of the posterior cerebral artery）；plg = 后岛长回（posterior long insular gyrus）；psg = 后岛短回（posterior short insular gyrus）。I = 嗅神经（olfactory nerve）；on = 视神经（optic nerve）；1 = 眶额动脉外侧支（lateral orbitofrontal artery）；2 = 额前动脉（prefrontal artery）；3 = 中央前沟动脉（precentral artery）；4 = 中央动脉（central artery）；5 = 顶前动脉（anterior parietal artery）；6 = 顶后动脉（posterior parietal artery）；7 = 内眦动脉（angular artery）；8 = 颞枕动脉（temporooccipital artery）；9 = 颞后动脉（posterior temporal artery）；10 = 颞中动脉（middle temporal artery）；11 = 颞前动脉（anterior temporal artery）；12 = 颞极动脉（temporal polar artery）。（摘自Türe U, Yaşargil MG, Al-Mefty O, Yaşargil DC. Arteries of the insula. J Neurosurg. 2000：92: 676–687）	Abbreviations: alg = anterior long insular gyrus; asg = anterior short insular gyrus; cis = central insular sulcus; ia = insular apex; it = inferior trunk of M2; msg = middle short insular gyrus; P2 = ambient segment of the posterior cerebral artery; plg = posterior long insular gyrus; psg = posterior short insular gyrus. I = olfactory nerve; on = optic nerve; 1 = lateral orbitofrontal artery; 2 = prefrontal artery; 3 = precentral artery; 4 = central artery; 5 = anterior parietal artery; 6 = posterior parietal artery; 7 = angular artery; 8 = temporooccipital artery; 9 = posterior temporal artery; 10 = middle temporal artery; 11 = anterior temporal artery; 12 = temporal polar artery. From Türe U, Yaşargil MG, Al-Mefty O, Yaşargil DC. Arteries of the insula. J Neurosurg. 2000; 92: 676–687.
图 4：岛叶肿瘤范围及术中血管关系。	Figure 4: Topography and operative vascular relationships for insular tumors.
注意外侧豆纹动脉起自M1段，并代表肿瘤切除术的内侧界。	Note how the lateral lenticulostriate arteries originate from the M1 segment and represent the medial limit of resection.
M2的短穿支为肿瘤提供血运。	Short M2 perforators supply the tumor.
M2长穿支有可能穿越肿瘤，但大多数情况为放射冠供血（特别是那些向中央沟走行的），所以术中需被保护（上图）。	Long M2 perforators may travel through the tumor, but most likely supply corona radiata (especially the ones travelling toward the central sulcus) and must be preserved (upper image).
上下环岛沟为切除术提供了解剖学的上下边界（下图）。暴露环岛沟保证了充分打开外侧裂，确保了残余肿瘤没有隐藏在术者视野的盲点。	The superior and inferior peri-insular sulci represent the lateral superior and inferior anatomic margins of the resection (lower image,) and their exposure ensures adequate Sylvian fissure split so that residual tumor does not hide within the blind spots of the operator.
岛叶表面大脑中动脉（MCA）的走行为手术带来了挑战。	The course of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) along the insular surface poses certain technical challenges during surgery.
岛叶大部分血运由MCA的M2及M3段发出的短穿支血管供应。	The insula receives most of its vascular supply from short perforating vessels originating from the M2 and M3 segments of the MCA.
这些短穿支常位于肿瘤的浅表，为肿瘤供血，在软膜下切除时可以安全地电凝切断，有效阻断肿瘤血液供应。	These short perforators, often engulfed by the superficial aspects of the tumor, can be safely coagulated and cut during subpial resection, effectively devascularizing the tumor.
M2段也分出长穿支动脉，位于岛叶后部，向上走行供应放射冠。	The M2 segments also give rise to long perforating branches that travel posteriorly and superiorly on the insula and supply the corona radiata.
需要保护这些分支以避免缺血性损伤造成的轻偏瘫。	These branches must be preserved to avoid ischemic injury resulting in hemiparesis.
谨慎分离血管并保留“过路型血管”（en passage vessels）非常重要。	Careful vascular dissection and preservation of en passage vessels is important.
图 5：前穿质部位（anterior perforated substance）左MCA的下面观。	Figure 5: An inferior view of the left MCA in the region of the anterior perforated substance.
注意外侧豆纹动脉如何从M1段分叉进入M2（星号处）。	Note how the lateral lenticulostriate arteries originate from the M1 segment as it bifurcates into the M2 branches (asterisk).
缩写：I = 嗅神经（olfactory nerve）；III = 动眼神经（oculomotor nerve）；A1 = 大脑前动脉交通前段（precommunicating segment of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA)）；ach = 脉络膜前动脉（anterior choroidal artery）；ICA = 颈内动脉（internal carotid artery）；it = M2段下干（inferior trunk of M2 segment）；li = 岛阈（limen insula）；M1 = MCA蝶段（sphenoidal segment of the MCA）；on = 视神经（optic nerve）；ot = 视束（optic tract）；P2 = 大脑后动脉环池段（ambient segment of posterior cerebral artery (PCA)）；pco = 后交通动脉（posterior communicating artery）；st = M2段上干（superior trunk of M2 segment）；tb = MCA颞支（temporal branch of the MCA）。MCA. From Türe U, Yaşargil MG, Al-Mefty O, Yaşargil DC. Arteries of the insula. J Neurosurg. 2000; 92: 676–687.	Abbreviations: I = olfactory nerve; III = oculomotor nerve; A1 = precommunicating segment of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA); ach = anterior choroidal artery; ICA = internal carotid artery; it = inferior trunk of M2 segment; li = limen insula; M1 = sphenoidal segment of the MCA; on = optic nerve; ot = optic tract; P2 = ambient segment of posterior cerebral artery (PCA); pco = posterior communicating artery; st = superior trunk of M2 segment; tb = temporal branch of the MCA. From Türe U, Yaşargil MG, Al-Mefty O, Yaşargil DC. Arteries of the insula. J Neurosurg. 2000; 92: 676–687.
外侧豆纹动脉（LLAs）起自M1段，走行于前穿质下，后出现于岛阈。	The M1 segment gives origin to the lateral lenticulostriate arteries (LLAs) as they course under the anterior perforated substance to emerge on the limen insula.
LLAs的数量个体差异大，从1根到15根不等，这些动脉供应基底节和内囊。	The number of LLAs can vary from only 1 to up to 15.
但若存在大体积肿瘤，这些动脉可能与M2-M3短穿支一起为肿瘤供血。	These arteries supply the basal ganglia and internal capsule, but in cases of large tumors, they can be a source of vascular supply to the insula along with the M2-M3 short perforating branches.
术中早期辨认LLAs是预防内侧结构缺血性损伤的关键。	Early identification of the LLAs is key to avoiding ischemic injury to the medial structures.
分离M1段近端处可以找到大多数外侧豆纹动脉。	Dissection of the proximal M1 segment allows identification most lateral LLAs.
岛叶肿瘤的显微外科切除	MICROSURGICAL RESECTION OF INSULAR TUMORS
如上所述，笔者对于所有岛叶肿瘤都倾向于选择清醒开颅术。	A mentioned above, I prefer an awake craniotomy for all insular tumors.
此板块将较详细地介绍具体的手术步骤。	The following sections describe the details of the procedure.
图 6：图示患者术中体位摆放，患者唤醒麻醉状态及部分区域局麻下行左侧大体积岛叶肿瘤切除术。	Figure 6: Patient positioning under conscious sedation and local anesthesia for resection of a large left insular glioma.
头夹单钉置于乳突区，以使左侧颞后区域充分暴露。	I place the single pin of the skull clamp on the mastoid area to have full access to the left posterior temporal territories.
颅骨切开的范围以可以暴露并定位相关功能区皮层为准。	The extent of the craniotomy is generous to allow exposure and mapping of the relevant functional cortices.
患者仰卧位，病灶同侧肩膀垫圆枕，头部向对侧旋转约30°。	The patient is positioned supine on the table with the ipsilateral shoulder elevated on a gel roll and the head turned 30 degrees contralateral to the surgical side.
笔者会使患者头稍上仰，方便暴露额顶盖下岛叶上部结构。	I apply some degree of head extension to facilitate access to the superior portion of the insula under the frontoparietal operculum.
该头位摆放也同样有利于外侧裂的分离，岛盖由于重力作用下沉，为到达岛叶后部提供了更方便的通路。	This head position facilitates Sylvian fissure split as it mobilizes the opercula under the pressure of gravity and provides a more accessible trajectory toward the most posterior portion of the insula.
如果患者头部转动幅度过大，会造成患者不适，并且颞盖可阻挡手术角度，不利于肿瘤后界的暴露。	If the head is turned excessively, the patient is uncomfortable and access to the posterior extent of the tumor can be limited as the temporal opercula will obstruct the operative working angle.
从根本而言，头部旋转角度及患者其他身体部位的摆放主要由患者的舒适度决定。	Ultimately, the degree of head rotation and the rest of the patient’s position are adjusted primarily for the patient’s comfort.
在放置头架前，笔者使用0.5%含肾上腺素的利多卡因与0.25%布比卡因1:1配置，阻滞眶上、滑车上、枕神经，切口线，颞肌根部及单钉置入处。	Before placing the skull clamp, 0.5% lidocaine with epinephrine and 0.25% bupivacaine in a 1:1 proportion is used to infiltrate the trajectories of the supraorbital, supratrochlear and occipital nerves, the incision line, the root of the temporalis muscle, and the pin sites.
头皮局部麻醉可以额外减轻患者痛苦。	This method of regional scalp anesthesia provides additional patient comfort.
术中，笔者常规使用立体定向技术。	Intraoperative stereotactic navigation is routinely used.
一旦肿瘤切除开始，术中大脑出现偏移，立体定位的可靠性会下降，这在切除术区外侧结构处更为明显。	Once resection begins, the reliability of navigation diminishes due to brain shift, especially for more lateral structures within the resection cavity.
更详细的术前准备请参考《胶质瘤的语言功能区定位》与《胶质瘤手术感觉运动功能区定位》章节。	Please refer to the chapters on Language Mapping and Sensorimotor Mapping for Glioma for more details about the initial stages of operative preparation.
笔者采取“外伤骨瓣”（"trauma flap"）或问号型切口。	A “trauma flap” or question mark incision is employed.
此类切口可及外侧裂全长，如需要可以行语言及感觉运动皮层定位。	This incision allows access to the entire length of the Sylvian fissure and permits mapping of the language and sensorimotor cortices, as necessary.
颅骨切开的后界可参考神经导航数据。	The posterior extension of the craniotomy can be tailored based on neuronavigation data.
皮瓣处理完毕后，有必要再对颞肌行浸润麻醉。	Once the scalp flap is reflected, additional anesthetic infiltration of the temporalis muscle is necessary.
硬膜内的手术操作	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
分离外侧裂	Sylvian Fissure Dissection
开颅及分离外侧裂时需予患者适量镇静药物。	The patient is moderately sedated during the craniotomy and Sylvian fissure dissection.
当外侧裂已充分分离，上下环岛沟暴露，肿瘤外侧部经外侧裂入路移除后，方可唤醒患者。	The process of reawakening should take place after the Sylvian fissure has been generously split, the superior and inferior peri-insular sulci identified, and the lateral portion of the tumor through the transsylvian route removed.
运用“自内向外”（“inside-to-outside”）技术分离外侧裂。	The Sylvian fissure is split using the “inside-to-outside” technique.
首先分离侧裂池远端的最宽处，并逐渐深入外侧裂直至明确岛叶表面的MCA支远端。	The distal part of the fissure harboring the generous Sylvian cistern is split, and this dissection is extended to the depth of the fissure to identify distal MCA branches on the surface of the insula.
接着，离断表面的外侧裂蛛网膜。	Next, overlying thick superficial Sylvian arachnoid membranes are disconnected.
图 7：外侧裂前点（anterior Sylvian point）恰位于三角部顶点的下方，其为侧裂池最宽大的部分，可以选做分离外侧裂的起点。	Figure 7: The anterior Sylvian point, just inferior to the vertex of the pars triangularis is the most generous portion of the Sylvian cistern where the Sylvian split can begin.
笔者一般自远处深部打开外侧裂后，分辨出MCA的远支作为继续分离外侧裂的标志。也就是所谓的“自内而外”（“inside to outside”）、自深向浅、自后向前分离。	I use the distal deep opening within the fissure and identify the distal MCA branches as a landmark to further open the fissure from “inside to outside” or deep to superficial and from the posterior to anterior direction.
笔者会避免大家常用的“自外而内”的分离技术，因为由于额颞盖的粘连以及缺乏标志物引导，该分离方法实施较为困难。	I avoid the commonly used “outside to inside” technique, which is more difficult to perform because of the adherence of the frontotemporal opercula and lack of any landmarks to guide dissection of the interdigitating opercula.
颞区侧裂浅静脉（superior Sylvian vein）需保护。	The superior Sylvian vein is preserved on the temporal side.
更多外侧裂分离的细节已在《外侧裂分离技术》一章探讨。	Further details regarding Sylvian fissure dissection are discussed in the Techniques of Sylvian Fissure Split chapter.
沿M1段远端完成外侧裂分离后，可推移颞盖及额盖从而暴露岛叶。	After extension and completion of the Sylvian fissure dissection more medially along the distal M1 segment, the temporal and frontal opercula are mobilized away from the insula.
颞盖与岛叶之间存在MCA分支使颞盖比额盖更易活动。	The presence of the MCA branches between the temporal operculum and the insula facilitates early mobilization of the temporal operculum more than the frontal operculum.
偶尔遇到的外侧裂桥静脉可以电凝并离断。	Occasional bridging Sylvian veins are coagulated and cut.
近端外侧裂分离应显露M1段远端和LLAs，以此减少术中对岛盖的牵拉。	At this point, proximal fissure dissection is extended to the level of the distal M1 segment and the LLAs to decrease the required amount of retraction on the opercula.
由于岛盖后部连接紧密，外侧裂远处的分离往往受到一定限制。	Distal fissure dissection is often limited because of adherence of the posterior opercula at this level; aggressive manipulation in this area will place the superior temporal gyrus at risk of injury.
此区域的盲目操作可能导致颞上回损伤。用吸引器及双极电凝轻移额颞盖可暴露岛叶皮质与环岛沟。	Gentle dynamic retraction of the frontotemporal opercula using the suction apparatus and bipolar forceps often provides good exposure of the insular cortex and the peri-insular sulci at each step of dissection.
肿瘤常常侵犯岛叶皮层并与岛盖部形成粘连，分离时可能导致肿瘤表面出血，术中可牺牲M2短小表浅的穿支方便止血，使显微手术顺利进行。	The tumor often violates the insular cortex and leads to adhesions between the opercula; dissection may lead to bleeding from the tumor surface and small short and superficial M2 perforators may be sacrificed early to allow for hemostasis and continuation of microsurgery.
必须避免对出血点盲目的过度电凝。	Aggressive indiscriminate coagulation in the face of bleeding must be avoided.
仅分离外侧裂为切除中等体积到大体积的岛叶肿瘤提供的手术通道相对较窄。	Sylvian fissure dissection alone provides a relatively narrow corridor for resection of most moderate to large size insular tumors.
另外，M3分支往往连接额颞盖与岛叶上部，进一步限制额叶的移动，使该部分肿瘤难以显露和切除。	In addition, M3 branches often tether the frontotemporal opercula to the superior insula, further limiting elevation of the frontal lobe and undermining its opercula to remove tumor underneath the frontoparietal banks.
这些限制是造成岛叶肿瘤次全切除的常见原因。	These limitations are some of the most common causes of subtotal resection in surgery for insular tumors.
由于这些肿瘤经常不同程度侵犯颞叶或额叶，所以往往需要额外在额颞盖皮质做切口或切除部分皮质，使其有足够的空间最大限度切除肿瘤。	Since these tumors often own varying degrees of temporal or frontal extensions, additional cortical incisions or resections within the frontotemporal opercula are necessary to allow enough space to maximize tumor excision.
当行额下回及颞上回皮质切口时，有必要对患者面部功能区域（若为非优势半球肿瘤）、Broca区及Wernicke区定位（若为优势半球肿瘤）定位，确保切口部位的安全。	Mapping of the patient’s face area (for nondominant tumors) or Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas (for dominant tumors) are necessary to further guide the location of the safe cortical incision(s) in the inferior frontal and superior temporal gyri.
这些操作增加了工作空间及角度，有利于在减少手术盲点的同时充分暴露肿瘤。	These maneuvers extend the working space and angles to facilitate adequate tumor exposure while minimizing the operative blind spots.
在开始切除肿瘤前，确保上下环岛沟充分暴露。	Before proceeding with tumor resection, the superior and inferior peri-insular sulci are generously uncovered.
岛叶肿瘤切除	Insular Tumor Resection
图 8：M2的岛叶皮质穿支需被完全电凝、锐性分离，避免牵拉时损伤上级血管（左图）。	Figure 8: The M2 perforators on the insular cortex must be thoroughly coagulated and sharply cut to avoid injury to the parent vessel via their avulsion (left image).
上级血管的撕扯伤可导致血管痉挛甚至闭塞，使远部MCA支配区域发生缺血性损伤（右图）。	Avulsion injury of the parent vessel can result in its severe spasm and even occlusion, causing catastrophic ischemic injury to the distal MCA territories (right image).
如果术中发现MCA血管壁有轻微损伤，可用凝血酶棉片覆盖破损处，稍加压即可止血。	If minor injury to the MCA wall is detected, a small piece of thrombin soaked cotton may be placed over the defect and gentle tamponade by the patient operator will stop the bleeding.
止血后棉片可弃去。	The small piece of cotton can then be removed.
罂粟碱浸泡的明胶海绵可缓解操作时M2-M3段血管的痉挛。	Papaverine-soaked gelfoam pledgets can relieve the spasm in the M2-M3 branches during their manipulation.
注意不可盲目电凝止血。	Aggressive coagulation is not advised.
在唤醒患者前，需先行将岛叶外侧部分肿瘤切除。	The lateral insular portion of the tumor should be removed before the patient is awakened.
因此，M2短穿支可电凝离断，牵开M2暴露被肿瘤侵犯的岛叶皮质。	To accomplish this step, the short perforating M2 branches are sacrificed and the M2 branches mobilized to uncover the insular cortex infiltrated by tumor.
在不过度牵拉岛盖的情况下最大程度暴露岛叶皮层是非常重要的。	Generous exposure of the insular cortex without aggressive retraction on the opercula is paramount.
如果肿瘤累及前颞叶区，可行前颞叶局部切除术，以此获得自下而上切除肿瘤的入路。	If the tumor involves the anterior part of the temporal lobe, a limited anterior temporal lobectomy can significantly expand the inferior-to-superior trajectory to allow tumor removal.
图9：一旦穿支动脉已电凝离断，可在M2分支间的岛叶皮质做数个软膜切口，从而为软膜下切除肿瘤提供窗口与通道。	Figure 9: Once the perforating arteries have been coagulated and divided, several pial incisions can be made on the insular cortex between the M2 branches, thus creating several working windows/channels for subpial resection of the tumor.
M2分支的不合理牵拉会损伤这些动脉，影响肿瘤切除范围。	Inadequate mobilization of the M2 branches places these arteries at risk and compromises the extent of resection.
图10：囊内减小肿瘤体积（intracapsular debulking）应为手术切除的第一步。	Figure 10: Intracapsular debulking of the mass is undertaken as the initial step in resection.
肿瘤的上下界可按坏岛沟的位置进行估计。	The superior and inferior intracapsular margins of the tumor are estimated based on the location of the peri-insular sulci.
肿瘤中心可用双极电凝及吸引器清除。	The core of the tumor is removed using bipolar coagulation and suction.
笔者在实施减瘤术时相对保守，病人唤醒并实施皮层下定位与神经功能检测后才着手处理肿瘤边界处。	I complete a conservative intracapsular tumor removal and avoid handling the tumor margins until later in the operation when subcortical mapping and frequent neurologic exams are conducted under awake conditions.
为了防止MCA损伤，笔者避免使用超声吸引刀，而使用双极电凝和普通吸引器处理肿瘤。	I avoid ultrasonic aspirators in fear of MCA injury and use bipolar electrocautery and suction device to emulsify and remove the tumor, respectively.
笔者习惯于将MCA的分支与外侧豆纹动脉保留在视线范围内，防止它们在操作中无意间损伤。	I always keep the MCA branches and lateral lenticulostriate arteries in sight to avoid their inadvertent injury by excessive retraction or manipulation.
外侧豆纹动脉是可靠的解剖学标志，用来界定可安全暴露、切除的最内界。	The lateral lenticulostriate arteries are reliable anatomic landmarks to define the safe medial extent of the exposure and resection.
它们通常靠内侧走行。	They are usually displaced medially.
尽管上下环岛沟勾勒出了手术区域的上下界，但这些标志常常会受肿瘤生长而发生偏移，故需神经导航进一步指导术者。	Although the superior and inferior peri-insular sulci define the superior and inferior extent of the lateral operative corridor, these landmarks are often affected by tumor expansion and navigation is used to further orient the operator.
位于肿瘤后上方走行的M2-M3长穿支血管必须严格保护。	The longer posteriorly and superiorly located M2-M3 perforators traveling toward the central lobule are strictly protected.
肿瘤外侧部切除后，可唤醒患者，行皮层下定位指导肿瘤上部及后部的切除。	After the lateral portion of the tumor is removed, the patient’s sedation is allowed to wear off and subcortical mapping may be later used to guide the removal of the posterior and superior poles of the tumor.
图11：该图示经外侧裂入路行局限于岛叶的肿瘤切除术的切除范围。	Figure 11: A view of the resection cavity depicted through the trans-Sylvian approach for tumors mainly confined to the insula.
外侧豆纹动脉（LLAs）组成了该空间的前界和内界。	The anterior and medial borders of the cavity are defined by the lateral lenticulostriate arteries (LLAs).
在切除中，LLAs与纹状体（注意它特征性的肉豆蔻样外观）是内界的2个解剖标志。	The LLAs and the striatum (note its characteristic nutmeg appearance) are the two anatomic landmarks for guiding the medial margin of the resection.
放射冠及内囊后肢位于此空间的后上方的边界处。	The corona radiata and the posterior limb of the internal capsule are located in the posterosuperior margins of the cavity.
此处肿瘤的进一步切除需依靠皮层下定位数据及患者直接反馈（术中测试），避免损伤这些白质束。	Further resection in this direction requires subcortical mapping and direct patient feedback (intraoperative exams) to avoid injury to these white matter tracts.
图 12：对于此岛叶肿瘤（右下小图）先行右颞叶切除术，小心牵开MCA分支（*）。	Figure 12: A right temporal lobectomy was initially completed for this insular tumor (inset image) and the MCA branches (*) have been mobilized.
笔者仔细寻找外侧豆纹动脉（LLAs）（蓝色箭头处），因为此处极轻微的电凝都可能导致这些血管的不可逆受损。	I carefully look for the LLAs (blue arrow), as any minor bipolar coagulation in their area will lead to their irreversible compromise.
具有特征性肉豆蔻外观的纹状体在这些穿支血管的背景下清晰可见。	The characteristic nutmeg appearance of the striatum is evident in the background of these perforators.
根据患者面部区域（黄色箭头所示）的皮层定位，切除额下回前部，以此暴露肿瘤前部。	Following cortical mapping of the patient’s face area (marked with yellow arrow), the anterior inferior frontal gyrus was removed to expose the frontal extension of the tumor (see below).
在皮层下定位技术的帮助下，继续行肿瘤切除术。	Tumor removal continues with the aid of subcortical mapping.
需要保护LLAs动脉穿支所在区域，而吸引器很容易损伤这些穿支动脉。	The region of the LLAs should be protected. The suction apparatus can easily injure these perforators.
此内侧区域的任何出血都可使用浸有凝血酶的明胶海绵适当加压止血。	Any bleeding in this medial region should be controlled with gentle pressure of a piece of gelfoam soaked in thrombin solution.
如何判断肿瘤切除的合理深度是个非常有挑战性的问题，远端LLAs为此提供了一个重要的标志。	Identifying the appropriate depth of resection can be very challenging, and the distal LLAs provide a reasonable landmark.
由于内侧结构受脑偏移的影响最小，故此时神经导航也提供了额外帮助。	Navigation can provide additional information at this juncture as the medial structures are least affected by brain shift.
高度放大、亮度充沛的显微手术视野下，术者依靠其丰富手术经验，观察组织的连续性、颜色、质地的变化，从这些细节中寻找区分肿瘤边界与正常白质的线索。	A highly magnified and well-illuminated surgical field through the use of the operating microscope and surgical experience can alert the operator to changes in consistency, color, and texture, which leads to clues about reaching the margins of the tumor in relation to the normal white matter.
在内囊后肢处处理肿瘤后界也是该手术最有挑战性的部分之一，在这最后阶段依旧需要耐心运用皮层下定位技术辅助。	Removing the posterior extension of the tumor into the posterior limb of internal capsule is one of the most challenging parts of the operation and should be performed patiently using subcortical mapping during the last operative stages.
一旦神经功能出现轻微、可逆的受损，应立即停止操作。	The resection should also be halted upon development of any minor reversible deficits.
除了上述讨论的解剖标志物、肿瘤的质地与连续性的变化，还可以参考以下参数指导肿瘤切除：	Essentially, in addition to anatomical landmarks discussed above and the change in the texture and consistency of the tumor, resection is guided based on the following parameters:
1、神经导航“估计”术者是否已经到达“正常”脑组织。	1.navigation “estimates” that the surgeon has reached the “normal” brain.
当然，需要考虑可误导术者的脑偏移情况（切除平面往往在导航所示的更外侧）。	The brain shift should be accounted for and can mislead the operator (often the plane of dissection is more lateral than indicated by navigation,)
2、皮层或皮层下刺激判断该处为功能皮层区或纤维束。	2.cortical or subcortical stimulation reveals functional cortices or fibers, or
3、术中测试时发现患者出现轻微的神经功能损伤。	3.the patient experiences a minor neurologic deficit on intraoperative testing.
术者也需考虑手术时长。一般而言，大多数病人可以配合完成大约3~4小时的清醒状态下手术过程。	Operative efficiency is pertinent because most patients remain cooperative for approximately 3-4 hours under awake conditions.
笔者不使用术中磁共振技术，因为它会使患者清醒阶段的手术时间延长。	I do not use intraoperative MRI as it leads to a long operative session for the awake patient.
其他考虑	Additional Considerations
对于较大体积肿瘤需要扩大外侧裂入路。	Larger tumors require expansion of the transsylvian corridor.
图13：经外侧裂入路切除该左侧岛叶肿瘤后，在额下回对运动语言区进行标记（Le），定位时未显示重要结构的额盖处可适当做部分皮质切除，以此暴露肿瘤的前极和上极。	Figure 13: After initial removal of this left insular tumor (inset) through the trans-Sylvian route, the motor speech area was mapped (Le) on the inferior frontal gyrus.  Additional corticotomy in the negatively mapped frontal opercula allowed further uncovering and exposure of the frontal and superior poles of the tumor.
图14：该弥漫性岛叶肿瘤位于优势半球，术中使用了经外侧裂联合经皮质入路。	Figure 14: Resection of a diffuse dominant insular tumor through a combined trans-Sylvian and transcortical approache is demonstrated.
左上、右上示术前、术后的影像学表现，与切除范围相符。	The left and right upper images demonstrate the pre- and postoperative images and corresponding extent of resection.
下方照片展示了行额下回、颞上回部分皮质切除，从而暴露额盖下的肿瘤边界前所行的功能区定位。	The lower photo illustrates the functional map in preparation for creating corticotomies within the inferior frontal and superior temporal gyri to reach the extensions of the tumor underneath the opercula.
关颅：	Closure
止血后，患者镇静状态下可关闭硬脑膜，此时不必追求水密缝合。	After hemostasis is achieved, the dura is closed while the patient is sedated. Watertight dural closure is not necessary.
大体积肿瘤切除后，可沿切口边缘及在骨瓣中央处进行悬吊，这是为了避免术后可能发生的硬膜外液体积聚。	Tack-up sutures at the edge of the craniotomy and in the center of the bone flap should be used because of the large size of the craniotomy in order to avoid postoperative epidural fluid collections.
术后处理：	Postoperative Considerations
预防性使用抗癫痫药物在岛叶胶质瘤术中及术后十分重要，由于手术操作可使功能皮层区兴奋，故抗癫痫药物的使用剂量可略高于治疗量。	Seizure prophylaxis is important during and after insular glioma surgery; slightly supratherapeutic levels are often desirable because a number of functional cortices are manipulated during surgery and are therefore excitable.
术前需测量药物浓度，并在术中及术后遵守严格的给药方案。	Drug levels should be measured before surgery and a strict dose schedule should be followed, including during surgery.
术后需行MRI，若影像学示肿瘤残余明显（通常位于额颞盖下部，或临近内囊），可考虑再次手术。	A postoperative MRI is obtained and if significant residual tumor is detected (most often underneath the frontotemporal opercula or near the internal capsule,) a repeat operation is considered.
大脑任何部位的缺血都可影响术后预后情况。	Any areas of ischemia will prognosticate recovery in the postoperative period.
术后24~48小时部分患者可出现神经功能受限的症状，特别在优势半球手术中，常出现语言功能缺陷。	It is not uncommon that some patients develop deficits 24 to 48 hours after surgery, especially language deficits for dominant-side surgery.
这种迟发的功能受损症状往往只是暂时的，其原理尚不明确，但可能与术后脑水肿及癫痫部分发作有关。	The etiology of such delayed but most often temporary deficits is not clearly understood, but postoperative edema and partial seizures most likely account for them.
EEG可示痫样放电，需合理选取抗惊厥药物剂量或相应地添加新药。	An EEG can be useful for detecting epileptiform discharges, and doses of anticonvulsant medications should be adjusted or new agents added accordingly.
大多数出现术后迟发性神经功能障碍的患者会在2~4周内恢复，可安慰患者不必过度担忧。	The majority of patients who develop delayed deficits will recover within a period of 2-4 weeks. The family should be reassured.
术后可立即使用类固醇，但一旦患者临床状态好转，便需逐步减药。	Steroids may be used during the immediate postoperative period, but should be tapered off quickly as the patient’s clinical status improves.
· 经外侧裂入路需要丰富的显微外科经验。	The transsylvian approach requires comfortable familiarity with microsurgical techniques to generously dissect the fissure.
岛叶肿瘤常常侵及白质，被额颞盖遮盖。	Insular tumors often extend into the white matter and are covered by the frontotemporal opercula.
因此，对于大体积岛叶肿瘤，可先行经外侧裂入路切除部分肿瘤，随后经额颞盖扩大手术入路继续切除剩余部分。	An initial trans-Sylvian resection and subsequent extension of the transopercular operative corridor allows reasonable access to large insular tumors.
· 损伤豆纹动脉或大脑中动脉导致的缺血性损伤是手术并发症的重要原因之一。	Ischemic injury as a result of damage to the lenticulostriate arteries or middle cerebral artery branches is one of the main causes of surgical morbidity.
为了避免并发症的发生，术者必须对该区域解剖有充分了解并具备精湛的显微外科技术。	To avoid these complications, the surgeon must have a thorough understanding of the regional anatomy and execute meticulous microsurgical techniques.
止血、轻柔对待血管组织是关键。	Hemostasis and gentle handling of the vasculature are crucial.
术中需保护为放射冠供血的M2长穿支动脉，在肿瘤出血过多时避免不经意地电凝。	The long M2-perforating arteries leading to the corona radiata and central lobule should also be preserved and not coagulated inadvertently in case of excessive bleeding from the tumor.
· 导致并发症的另一原因是下行运动纤维受损。因此，术中需仔细辨别肿瘤前界的远端外侧豆纹动脉（LLAs），并在肿瘤后界对内囊行皮层下定位。	Injury to the descending motor fibers can be another source of morbidity and should be avoided via careful identification of distal LLAs more anteriorly and subcortical mapping at the level of the internal capsule more posteriorly.
过度切除可导致明显的并发症。	Aggressive resection can lead to significant morbidity.
· 经外侧裂入路的另一常见并发症是过度牵拉岛盖，损伤Broca区、上环岛沟附近的弓状束水平纤维、及下环岛沟附近的钩束纤维。	Another common cause of morbidity after the trans-Sylvian approach is excessive retraction on the opercula, which can injure the Broca’s area, the horizontal fibers of the arcuate fasciculus near the superior periinsular sulcus, or the fibers of the uncinate fasciculus near the inferior periinsular sulcus.
为了预防此类损伤，笔者不鼓励使用固定的牵开器，而是采用动态牵拉技术。	To prevent this type of injury, I discourage the use of fixed retractors and encourage the use of the dynamic retraction technique.
笔者使用吸引器及双极电凝镊来推移岛盖，并不断改变受力点。	I use the suction apparatus and bipolar forceps to mobilize the opercula while constantly shifting the pressure points.
· 术中，如果由于语言区未暴露或无法定位，因此未获得阳性定位结果，术者可能不得不依靠阴性定位结果（“negative stimulation mapping”）进行手术。	The surgeon may have to rely on “negative stimulation mapping” without identification of unexposed or unmappable “positive” eloquent areas.
· 一部分岛叶肿瘤可向外侧裂突出。	Some insular tumors expand the insula and may protrude through the Sylvian fissure.
这表明额颞盖可能与岛叶皮层有明显粘连，这也意味着术中分离困难，很可能对血管和功能皮层造成损伤。	This finding means significant adherence of the frontotemporal opercula to the insular cortex, making dissection difficult and placing the vasculature and functional cortices at risk.
胶质瘤手术感觉运动功能区定位技巧	Sensorimotor Mapping for Glioma
肿瘤手术的目标是最大程度的切除肿瘤，同时避免神经功能障碍。	The goal of tumor surgery is to maximize tumor resection while avoiding neurologic deficit.
肿瘤最大程度有效切除可以控制癫痫发作、改善由占位引起的不适症状、降低手术取样误差风险。对低级别胶质瘤患者，可以降低恶化转移的风险。	Effective maximal resection leads to seizure control, improvement of symptoms caused by mass effect, a decreased risk of sampling error, and in patients with low-grade gliomas, a decreased risk of malignant transformation.
肿瘤切除的程度也与肿瘤的进展时间和患者总体生存时间有关。	The extent of resection also is associated with time to tumor progression and overall survival.
肿瘤复发风险最大的是影像学上增强信号或肿瘤边界向外2cm范围内的区域，因此理想的手术切除策略应该是切除时稍微超过肿瘤边界。	Because the greatest risk of tumor recurrence occurs within 2 cm of the contrast-enhancing region or tumor borders, the ideal resection strategy should preferably extend slightly beyond these borders.
但是，当术后出现明显神经功能障碍如偏瘫时，扩大切除带来的生存优势则会丧失。	However, the loss of survival advantage is lost when a significant postoperative neurologic deficit such as hemiparesis is incurred.
因此，中央沟周围区胶质瘤手术的安全性对患者康复而言至关重要。	Therefore, the safety of glioma surgery near the perirolandic region is crucial for its consideration in the care of the patient.
位于中央小叶（感觉运动区）的功能皮层和白质纤维束常限制手术的切除范围。	The presence of functional cortices and white matter tracts of the central lobule (sensorimotor cortices) often limits the extent of resection.
使用脑皮层电刺激可导航脑功能区。	Cortical stimulation is used to circumnavigate the eloquent brain.
利用这种方法对感觉或运动皮层进行局灶性电刺激，可造成该部分去层去极化，导致不受控制的运动反应或感觉异常。	Using this method, a very focal region of the sensory or motor cortex is depolarized, resulting in uncontrolled motor responses or paresthesias.
脑皮层电刺激定位可通过两种方式进行：麻醉下（睡眠定位）或清醒镇静下（唤醒定位）。	Cortical stimulation mapping can be conducted in two ways: Under anesthesia (sleep mapping) or under conscious sedation (awake mapping).
毋庸置疑，睡眠定位对患者而言更加舒适，如果它能为肿瘤安全切除提供必要且可靠的信息，应当被采用。	Undoubtedly, sleep mapping is more comfortable for the patient and should be performed if it will provide necessary and reliable information for a safe resection.
感觉运动区定位一般应用于轴内病变切除，最常用于靠近或部分浸润感觉运动区皮层和放射冠的胶质瘤手术中。	Sensorimotor mapping is typically used for resection of intra-axial lesions and, most frequently, gliomas near or partially infiltrating the sensorimotor cortices and corona radiata.
笔者对海绵状血管畸形或转移瘤手术不采用这种方法，除非定位信息可以引导正常皮层切口至深部病变的精确位置。	I do not use this method for cavernous malformations or metastasis unless mapping information can guide the exact location of the initial corticotomy within the normal cortex to reach the deep lesion.
与辅助运动区和内囊有关的浸润性肿瘤也适用于该定位方法。	Infiltrating tumors associated with the supplementary motor area and internal capsule are also suitable candidates for mapping.
笔者应用功能区定位（唤醒型或睡眠型）主要是处理累及中央小叶的低级别胶质瘤。	I use mapping (awake or sleep) primarily for low-grade gliomas affecting the central lobule.
对于侵犯皮质功能区及传导束的高级别胶质瘤（HGGs）而言，哪怕术中保留了这些功能区组织，术后也常出现神经功能受损。	The use of this technique for resection of high-grade gliomas (HGGs) directly infiltrating the functional cortices and tracts often leads to neurologic morbidity, despite preservation of these functional areas.
同时次全切除HGGs与术后生存率下降及血肿形成相关（因此笔者倾向于全切肿瘤，而非可以保留功能区组织，译者注）。	Subtotal resection of these HGGs is also associated with postoperative neurological decline and risk of hematoma formation.
然而，在对于那些特定的、并未侵犯功能区而仅仅毗邻功能区的HGGs，笔者确实在术中使用皮层定位技术。	However, I do use mapping for specific HGGs that do not directly infiltrate the functional areas, but are adjacent to them.
这样可以确保肿瘤完整切除的边界恰恰位于无功能区。	This strategy allows mapping for safe resection in nonfunctional peritumoral regions in expectation of radical tumor removal.
具体来说，如果肿瘤没有直接累及中央小叶及其相关的白质纤维束，但与这些重要的结构相邻在毫米以内，笔者更喜欢采用睡眠型功能区定位。	More specifically, I prefer to use sleep mapping if the tumor does not directly infiltrate the central lobe and its associated white matter tracts but is anatomically within millimeters of these vital structures.
相反，如果术前MRI和功能MRI（fMRI）提示肿瘤直接浸润这些功能区，笔者则更偏好使用唤醒型功能区定位。	Instead, I use awake mapping for tumors that directly infiltrate these structures as shown on preoperative anatomical magnetic resonance (MR) or functional MR (fMR) imaging.
对浸润中央后回的肿瘤患者，使用唤醒型定位，因为刺激该部位可以引起人的主观感觉异常，在麻醉的患者中监测不到。	Patients with tumors that infiltrate the postcentral gyrus undergo awake mapping because stimulation of this gyrus leads to subjective paresthesias that are not detectable in an anesthetized patient.
关于唤醒型功能区定位的具体信息，请参考胶质瘤手术的语言功能区定位章节。	For details of awake mapping, please refer to the chapter on Language Mapping for Glioma.
唤醒型功能区定位（与睡眠型功能区定位比较）受麻醉干扰最小，定位最可靠。	Awake mapping provides the most reliable mapping method (compared with sleep mapping) with minimal interference from the anesthesia.
这是笔者对直接浸润中央小叶低级别胶质瘤患者喜欢采用唤醒型定位的原因。	This is the reason for my preference to map the functional cortex while the patient is awake for low-grade gliomas that infiltrate directly into the central lobule.
此外，唤醒状态下患者可以直接反馈，术中也可以连续进行检查，采用这些可靠的监测手段，从而引导术者更积极的进行肿瘤切除。	In addition, the direct feedback of an awake patient and continuous intraoperative examinations are the most reliable monitoring tools that encourage the surgeon to be more aggressive during tumor resection.
对大多数患者，运动功能区定位不需要患者处于唤醒状态。因此，术中患者配合没有像唤醒型功能区定位时那么重要。	In most cases, motor mapping does not require the patient to be awake, therefore patient cooperation is less critical than the one required for awake mapping.
术前评估患者的感觉运动功能很重要。	Preoperative evaluation of sensorimotor function is important.
明显偏瘫会影响脑皮层和皮层下的定位，患者术前相应肢体应该至少有抗重力运动作用。	Significant hemiparesis hinders cortical and subcortical mapping; the patient should at least have antigravity movement in the corresponding extremities preoperatively.
此外，6岁以下的儿童皮质功能兴奋性可能会降低。	Also, children under the age of 6 may have decreased cortical excitability.
当运动皮层兴奋性刺激不可行时，则应该使用体感诱发电位（SSEPs）识别中央沟。	Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) should be used instead to identify the central sulcus when motor cortex excitation is not feasible.
术前影像学检查有助于确定是否要行运动功能区定位。	Preoperative imaging determines the need for motor mapping.
术前使用MRI可以对感觉运动功能区进行解剖定位，	The sensorimotor cortices can be anatomically localized using preoperative MRI.
中央小叶的影像学定位比语言皮层区的定位更可靠。	This radiographic localization is often more reliable for central lobule than the speech cortices.
长期生长的病变如皮质发育不良、脑动静脉畸形和神经节细胞胶质瘤可能会引起功能区移位。	Long-standing lesions such as cortical dysplasias, arteriovenous malformations, and gangliogliomas can displace function.
图1. 中央沟的影像学标志。	Figure 1: The radiographic landmarks for the central sulcus are demonstrated.
源自于额上沟（绿色箭头）水平部末端向后的第二条垂直脑沟的是中央沟（红色箭头）（左图）。	The second, more posterior vertical sulcus, from the end of the horizontal superior frontal sulcus (green arrows) is the central sulcus (red arrow) (left image).
更多可靠的定位方法如下：先在正中矢状位MRI找到扣带沟（绿色箭头），然后向上（边缘沟）直至大脑边缘。	A more reliable method is as follows: I trace the cingulate sulcus (green arrows) on midsagittal MRI images posteriorly, then superiorly (marginal sulcus) to its end.
边缘沟位于Rolandic区（中央小叶：红色箭头包绕区）后方，（右图）。	The marginal sulcus is just posterior to the rolandic cortex (central lobule) bounded by the red arrows, right image.
越来越多的功能影像技术用于感觉运动区的定位。	Functional imaging is increasingly used for mapping the sensorimotor cortices.
这种方法对于定位中央小叶相对可靠，也能依据肿瘤浸润功能区的程度决定使用唤醒型功能区定位还是睡眠型功能区定位。	This method is relatively reliable for localizing the central lobule and can determine the need for awake versus sleep mapping based on the degree of functional cortex infiltration by the tumor.
fMRI定位识别感觉运动功能区比语言功能区更可靠。	Functional MRI is more reliable for identifying sensorimotor than for localizing language function.
这是个有价值的辅助检查手段，但脑皮层电刺激是功能区定位和确保肿瘤安全切除的金标准。	It is a valuable complementary tool, but cortical stimulation is the gold standard for mapping function and securing a safe resection.
图2. 紧靠运动区前方的肿瘤需要使用运动功能区定位，确保肿瘤最大程度的安全切除。	Figure 2: The location of this tumor just anterior to the motor cortex required motor mapping to allow its maximal safe removal.
额上沟（蓝色箭头），中央沟（红色箭头）（左图）。	The blue arrow marks the superior frontal sulcus and the red arrow marks the central sulcus (left image).
fMRI提示位于中央小叶前部和内侧的肿瘤（中图）。	Functional imaging (fMRI) located the tumor just anterior and medial to the central lobule (middle image).
术后MRI显示占位病变全切（右图）。	Postoperative MRI demonstrates gross total resection of the mass (right image).
该患者术后出现暂时性足部无力，4周后完全缓解。	This patient suffered from temporary foot weakness that completely resolved in 4 weeks.
发生任何永久性的神经功能障碍都会削弱或消除由手术切除肿瘤带来的任何生存优势。	Development of any permanent neurologic deficit can blunt or eliminate any survival advantage gained by resection.
由于肿瘤直接浸润运动功能区，有必要使用唤醒型功能区定位，术中定期检查，确保和判断肿瘤安全切除的范围。	Because of direct infiltration of the tumor into the motor cortex, awake mapping with periodic intraoperative exams were deemed necessary to ensure and justify aggressive tumor resection.
深入了解大脑皮层相关的表面解剖学标志有益于术前和术中的手术计划。	An indepth understanding of the cortical anatomy in relation to the surface landmarks is beneficial for pre- and intraoperative planning.
图3. 颅缝与脑皮层之间的关系。	Figure 3: Relationship of the cranial sutures to the cortical surface.
中央沟常位于冠状缝后3.5-4.5cm。	The central sulcus is usually 3.5 to 4.5 cm behind the coronal suture.
中央前回下端位于岛盖部后方，中央后回的下端位于缘上回的前方。	The lower portion of the precentral gyrus is located just posterior to the pars opercularis, and the similar portion of the postcentral gyrus is immediately anterior to the supramarginal gyrus.
脑回桥（黄色箭头，中图）连接中央前回和中央后回以至于中央沟不能直接汇入侧裂。	There is a gyral ridge (yellow arrow, middle image) connecting the precentral and postcentral gyri so that the central sulcus never directly joins the Sylvian fissure.
另一黄色箭头位于鼻根-枕外隆突线中点，红色箭头位于中央沟，黄色箭头后方约2cm处（下图）（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr教授授权）。	Another yellow arrow is placed along the midline at the 50% nasion-inion line, and the red arrow shows the location of the central sulcus approximately 2 cm behind this 50% point (lower image) (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
开颅手术计划中这些解剖学标志非常重要。	These landmarks are important during planning of the craniotomy.
睡眠型功能区定位切除旁中央小叶胶质瘤	SLEEP MAPPING FOR RESECTION OF GLIOMAS ASSOCIATED WITH THE PARACENTRAL LOBULE
据术前影像检查识别中央小叶，确定肿瘤浸润程度，选择唤醒型功能区定位还是睡眠型功能区定位。	The central lobule should be identified on preoperative imaging to determine the degree of its involvement with the tumor and the need for sleep versus awake mapping.
神经麻醉是定位成功的必要条件。	Neuroanesthesia is imperative for success of any mapping procedure.
唤醒型定位麻醉详细信息请参考胶质瘤手术的语言功能区定位章节。	For details of anesthesia for awake mapping, please refer to the chapter on Language Mapping for Glioma.
睡眠型定位麻醉需避免使用麻痹性药物。	The anesthesia for sleep mapping requires avoidance of paralytic medications.
气管插管的全身麻醉吸入性药物是咪达唑仑联合芬太尼。	Endotracheal general anesthesia is composed of inhalation agents combined with midazolam (Versed) and fentanyl.
有关术中暴露和开颅的具体细节请参考The Neurosurgical Atlas其他部分，包括手术入路一章。	For general details regarding exposure and craniotomy, please refer to other sections of this Atlas, including the Cranial Approaches volume.
术中导航可以指导开颅的范围大小。	Intraoperative navigation guides the extent of an adequate craniotomy.
仰卧位适用于中央小叶前部至中央小叶内部病变，但如果病变位于中央小叶后部，笔者则会考虑侧卧位。	Although the supine patient positioning is adequate for lesions anterior to and within the central lobule, I consider using the lateral position if the lesion is situated just posterior to the lobule.
此外，选择仰卧位时可以在同侧垫高肩膀以便于手术。	Alternatively, the supine position can be employed with the ipsilateral shoulder highly elevated on a bulky gelrest.
图4. 术前MRI，位于右侧半球中央小叶前下部的Ⅲ级间变星形胶质细胞瘤，患者体位及头皮切口如上图所示。	Figure 4: Preoperative MRI, patient positioning and scalp incision for resection of a Grade III anaplastic astrocytoma along the anterior inferior aspect of the right central lobule are demonstrated (upper row).
肿瘤向后延伸到运动区的下方。	The tumor extends posteriorly into the lower bank of the motor cortex.
骨瓣的范围应足够显露中央小叶，瘤周及功能区向外至少2cm的皮层。	The bone flap is generous and designed to encompass the central lobule and at least 2 cm of the cortex around the perimeter of the tumor and functional cortices.
对于睡眠型功能区定位，术中肌电图（EMG）可用来监测患者对侧肢体，神经电生理团队通过肉眼观察肢体活动（左下图）。	For sleep mapping, intraoperative electromyographic (EMG) monitoring is used and the patient’s contralateral limbs are uncovered so the neurophysiology team can readily detect any motor activity via direct visual inspection (left lower image).
对侧肢体无静脉输液通道和其他植入物。	The contralateral limbs are also left free of intravenous lines and other implants.
术腔深部行皮层下电刺激可记录到电信号及面部肌肉活动（右下图）。	The right lower image demonstrates stimulation results and resultant facial muscle activity upon subcortical stimulation at the depth of resection cavity.
定位技巧	Mapping Technique
睡眠型功能区的定位结果受麻醉方式的影响，即使术中反复检查神经功能也无法获得即时反馈。	The results of sleep mapping can be affected by the method of anesthesia and immediate feedback via frequent intraoperative neurological exams is not available.
图5. 运动功能区定位。	Figure 5: Mapping the motor cortex.
运用硬膜下条状电极检测放电部位（Ha：手；Sh：肩膀；Fo：足）。	A subdural strip electrode is used to detect afterdischarge potentials (Ha: hand; Sh: shoulder; Fo: foot).
肿瘤位置标记为“X”。	The location of the tumor is marked by “X.”
唤醒刺激定位感觉运动区开始电流为1.5mA~2mA。	Awake stimulation mapping of the sensorimotor cortex is started at 1.5-2mA.
该刺激参数可以间歇性升高1~2mA直至引出主观或客观反应。	This stimulation parameter is increased at 1-2 mA intervals until subjective or objective responses are elicited.
刺激运动区可引起相应肢体出现暂时的不可控性运动。	Stimulation of the motor cortex leads to brief uncontrolled movements of the corresponding segments of the limb.
刺激感觉区可引起主观感觉的异常。	Stimulation of the sensory cortex leads to subjective paresthesias.
持续性运动则意味着刺激过度/局灶性癫痫发作，使用冷盐水冲洗可防止其发展为全身发作性癫痫。	Sustained movements signify overstimulation/focal seizures, and ice-cold saline irrigation should be used to prevent progression to a generalized seizure.
对睡眠型功能区定位，合适的刺激起始电流为2mA并持续刺激2~3s。	For sleep mapping, delivering stimulus lasting 2 to 3s at 2mA is an appropriate starting point.
刺激参数可以以1~2mA的增量直到最大值16mA。	The stimulus can be increased in 1 to 2mA increments to a maximum of 16mA.
相比较而言，唤醒型功能区定位最大常用电流为6~10mA。	For comparison, the maximum current used for awake patients is typically 6-10mA.
电流发生器应设置为双相方波脉冲（每相1.25ms）4s/60Hz。	The generator should be set to deliver biphasic square wave pulses (1.25ms per phase) in 4-second trains at 60Hz.
双极电极尖端直径1mm，间隔5mm。	The bipolar electrode should be 1mm at its tips, separated by 5mm.
每个功能区条状电极位置检查三遍以确保精确性。	Each cortical site is checked three times to ensure accuracy.
出现后发放电位表明目前的电流刺激太高，需要降低刺激避免不可靠的定位和皮层刺激的扩散。	Afterdischarge potentials indicate that the current is too high and needs to be decreased to avoid unreliable mapping and cortical spread of stimulation.
定位患者腿部相应运动区时，将条状电极沿着大脑镰放置，直至超过中央前回内侧从而完成定位。	For mapping the motor cortex corresponding to the patient’s leg, a strip electrode is inserted along the falx and mapping completed over the medial precentral gyrus.
当硬膜开口处靠近但还未显露运动区皮层时，也可以利用这一技术，将硬膜下条状电极置于骨窗下完成定位。	Similarly, a subdural strip electrode may be used underneath the edges of the craniotomy where the dural opening is near but not immediately over the motor cortex.
脑皮层刺激和皮层下刺激过程中，通过使用相同的方案轻度升高（1-2mA）刺激参数即可记录到从皮层到脊髓的下行纤维束：皮质脊髓束。	Following cortical stimulation and during subcortical dissection, the descending fibers of the corticospinal tract can be traced anywhere from the cortex to the spinal cord by using the same protocol with slightly (1-2mA) higher stimulation parameters.
由于功能性纤维束可能由肿瘤包裹，皮层下刺激定位对指导肿瘤安全切除并保留功能至关重要。	Because functional fibers may be found engulfed within the tumor, subcortical mapping can be critical to guide tumor resection while preserving function.
肿瘤切除后，应行最后一轮刺激评估纤维束功能的完整性。	After resection of the tumor, a final round of stimulation should be performed to evaluate functional integrity of the tracts.
对于重复手术者，如果硬膜紧贴脑皮层，分离可能造成软脑膜损伤（无法进行皮层刺激）时，皮层下刺激有助于定位和监测功能区。	During repeat operations, if the dura is adherent to the underlying cortex and cannot be mobilized without a potential risk of pial injury, subcortical mapping is instrumental in mapping and monitoring function.
经硬膜皮层定位也是一种选择，但不可靠。	Transdural cortical mapping is an option, but not very reliable.
运用体感诱发电位的相位反转技巧	Phase Reversal Technique Using Somatosensory Evoked Potentials
运用体感诱发电位的相位反转技巧能快速安全的发现感觉运动功能区。	Somatosensory evoked potentials can be used to find the sensorimotor cortex quickly and safely using the “phase reversal” technique.
使用8触点条状皮层电极横置于多个脑回上，刺激对侧正中神经或胫神经。	An eight-contact strip electrode is placed transversely across multiple gyri and the contralateral median or tibial nerve is stimulated.
两触点中间空间出现相位反转的区域就是中央沟。	The space between the two contacts where electrical phase reversal is detected defines the location of the central sulcus.
轻轻移动电极并重复该步骤有助于术者完整确认中央沟的位置。	Moving the electrode slightly and repeating this process can help the operator confirm the location of the sulcus.
相位反转识别中央沟安全可靠，适用于切除不直接侵犯功能区的病灶。	Phase reversal is a safe and reliable method for identifying the central sulcus for resection of a lesion not directly infiltrating the functional cortices.
在切除边界清楚的病灶（如转移性肿瘤和海绵状血管瘤）时，可用刺激术寻找合适的手术角度及脑皮层切开位点。	This information may be used to find the appropriate trajectory and corticotomy site for resection of well-defined lesions such as metastatic tumors and cavernous malformations.
其他注意事项	Other Considerations
非优势面部运动区可以切除，但会出现暂时性面瘫。	The nondominant face motor cortex may be removed, apparently resulting in only temporary facial weakness.
笔者曾有过切除浸润面部功能区的胶质瘤经验，只要靠近运动功能区相关的白质纤维束完好保留，面部功能终会完全恢复。	I have personally removed gliomas that infiltrated the face area and witnessed complete return of facial function as long as the underlying white matter tracts for the adjacent motor cortices were left intact.
肿瘤切除过程中，保护通往中央小叶的过路血管很重要。	During tumor resection, preservation of en passage vessels leading to the central lobule is imperative.
这些血管无意损伤是导致术后不明原因的神经系统病变最常见的原因。	Inadvertent injury to these vessels is one of the most common causes of unexplained postoperative neurologic morbidity.
切除运动功能区前部脑皮层可导致短暂性偏瘫/轻偏瘫或辅助运动区（SMA）综合征。	Resection of the cortices just anterior to the motor cortex can lead to transient hemiplegia/hemiparesis or supplementary motor area (SMA) syndrome.
保护起源于运动功能区至放射冠前下部相关的下行纤维束至关重要。	Preservation of the underlying descending motor fibers that originate from the motor cortex and travel anteroinferiorly toward corona radiata is critical.
这可以通过脑皮层下定位来完成。	This can be accomplished using subcortical mapping.
切除或损伤中央后回会导致本体感觉障碍。	Removal of or injury to the postcentral gyrus leads to disabling proprioception deficits.
本体感觉障碍随时间会明显改善，但手部的精细动作功能和步态将永久性受限。	These deficits improve significantly over time, but some functional limitations in fine hand movement and gait will be permanent.
病例	Case Examples
病例1：男性，32岁，癫痫症状。诊断为低级别胶质瘤，位于顶叶中央小叶后部。	Case 1: A 32 year-old man presented with seizures and was diagnosed with a parietal low-grade glioma posterior to the central lobule.
图6. 术前MRI和fMRI提示病变位于运动功能区后部和下部（黄色）（第一行）。	Figure 6:  Preoperative MRI and fMRI demonstrated the tumor to be posterior and inferior to the motor cortex (in yellow) (upper row).
脑皮层和皮层下唤醒定位切除占位（第二行）。	Awake cortical and subcortical mapping allowed reasonable resection of the mass (bottom row).
术腔前部稍高T2高信号，可能是残余肿瘤；脑皮层下定位提示该区域有运动纤维束存在，放弃进一步切除该区域病灶。	Slight T2 hyperintensity anterior to the resection cavity is most likely residual tumor; subcortical mapping prohibited further resection in this area due to the presence of motor fibers.
病例2：男性，35岁，表现为顽固性癫痫。	Case 2: 35 year-old make presented with intractable seizures.
图7. 术前影像学提示为低级别胶质瘤，位于右侧脑室周围并扩展至额叶内侧。	Figure 7: Preoperative images demonstrate a low-grade glial tumor located in the right periatrial region extending to the medial frontal lobe.
中间一列的上图（冠状位）和下图（矢状位）fMRI提示肿瘤位于感觉运动功能区。	Middle panel, upper image (coronal) and lower image (sagittal) functional MR images demonstrate the location of the sensorimotor cortex draped over the upper pole of the tumor.
扩散张量成像（DTI）（右上图）显示肿瘤推挤运动功能纤维束移位。	Diffusion tensor imaging (right upper image) reveals displacement of motor fibers by the tumor.
为了避免过度牵拉同侧功能区，到达肿瘤外侧缘，笔者使用经对侧纵裂入路切开大脑镰技术安全切除肿瘤。	To avoid undue retraction on the ipsilateral functional cortices and reach the lateral pole of the tumor, I attempted a tranfalcine resection of the mass via a contralateral interhemispheric route.
图8. 经大脑镰入路手术角度（最上图）。	Figure 8: A view of the operative trajectory via the transfalcine route is demonstrated (top image).
笔者使用脑皮层刺激定位额叶内侧至肿瘤前部功能区。	I used cortical stimulation to map the medial frontal cortices anterior to the tumor.
使用皮层下功能区定位和经大脑镰“斜线”入路切除肿瘤。	A “cross-court” approach was used to resect the tumor using subcortical mapping.
术后影像提示占位完全切除（底下图）。	Postoperative images demonstrate gross total resection of the mass without any complicating feature (bottom images).
病例3：男性，45岁，表现为左侧局灶运动性癫痫发作。	Case 3: A 45 year-old male presented with left-sided focal motor seizures.
图9. 影像学提示右侧中央小叶胶质瘤（左上图）。	Figure 9: A right-sided central lobule glioma is found on imaging (left upper photo).
病变位于运动功能区，考虑可能无法手术切除。	The location of the lesion in the motor cortex may render it inoperable.
然而，DTI成像（下图）提示功能区纤维束受推挤移位，提高了笔者安全切除肿瘤的信心。	However, diffusion tensor imaging (lower row) increased my confidence in the safety of resection by demonstrating the displacement of the functional fiber tracts.
使用脑皮层和皮层下定位实现肿瘤全切，术后无遗留任何神经功能障碍（右上图）。	A gross total removal was achieved using awake cortical and subcortical mapping without infliction of any postoperative neurological deficit (right upper image).
由于唤醒定位操作会限制术区无菌巾覆盖的范围，故术后使用抗生素48h。	Antibiotics are used for 48 hours after surgery because of the limitations on sterile draping of the surgical field during awake procedures.
无癫痫发作患者，术后抗癫痫药物使用7天，术后48h复查MRI。	Anticonvulsant drugs are used for 7 days in patients without seizures, and postoperative imaging is performed within 48 hours.
类固醇类激素缓慢减量。	The steroids are tapered slowly.
术后感觉运动功能障碍的发生风险很高，特别是侵袭至感觉运动功能区的肿瘤。	The risk of temporary postoperative deficits of sensorimotor function is significant, especially with tumors directly infiltrating the sensorimotor cortices.
如果手术结束时患者功能完整或轻度受损，但术后第1天功能变差者，最终恢复的机率很大。	If function is intact or mildly compromised at the end of the operation, but worsens on the first postoperative day, the opportunity for meaningful recovery is substantial.
然而，如果手术结束时患者功能就显著下降，则常意味着是不可逆性直接损伤或缺血性损伤。	However, a significant decline at the end of the operation usually signifies an irreversible direct or ischemic injury.
术后第一天最常见的神经功能变差原因是亚临床型癫痫发作。	The most common reason for neurologic decline on the first postoperative day is subclinical seizures.
术后早期有必要使用高于治疗剂量的抗惊厥药物。	Supratherapeutic levels of anticonvulsant medications are necessary for the immediate postoperative period.
癫痫发作延缓神经功能恢复，也令患者家属非常沮丧。	Seizures delay neurologic recovery and are very disheartening to the patient’s family.
· 仔细评估术前影像，确定感觉运动区解剖位置，选择合适的定位方法。	Careful preoperative imaging evaluation determines the anatomic location of the sensorimotor gyri and selection of an appropriate mapping strategy.
· 相位反转技巧对识别中央沟安全可靠，可用于切除边界明确，不直接侵犯功能区的病灶。	Phase reversal is a safe and reliable method for identifying the central sulcus for resection of well-defined lesions that do not directly infiltrate the functional cortices.
· 近中央小叶病变可以使用睡眠型功能区定位，如果病变直接浸润这些功能区及相应的下行纤维束，唤醒型定位更可靠。	Patients with lesions near the central lobule may undergo sleep mapping, but if the lesion directly infiltrates these cortices and their corresponding descending tracts, awake mapping may be more reliable.
唤醒型定位方法通过术中神经功能检查可以不受麻醉影响，患者可以直接反馈。	The awake method is unaffected by anesthesia and allows direct patient feedback via frequent intraoperative neurological examinations.
经胼胝体入路胶样囊肿切除技巧	Colloid Cyst (Transcallosal Approach)
胶样囊肿位于三脑室顶，紧邻室间孔，约占颅内占位的0.5-1%。	Colloid Cysts represent 0.5-1% of intracranial lesions and are located within the third ventricular roof immediately adjacent to the foramen of Monro.
这些囊肿起源于原始神经上皮（旁突体成分）的异常折叠，因囊内含有粘稠的胶样液体状物质这一特性而得名。	These cysts uniquely contain a viscous gelatinous material and originate from abnormal folding of the primitive neuroepithelium (the paraphysis elements).
胶样囊肿可长至一定体积，罕见情况下甚至引起室间孔的突然堵塞，导致危及生命的急性梗阻性脑积水。	Colloid cysts can reach a substantial size and exceedingly rarely precipitate a sudden occlusion of the foramen of Monro, causing life-threatening acute obstructive hydrocephalus.
梗阻的原因可能与囊内突发出血、腰穿后肿块的移位或者分流失效相关。	The method of occlusion can be related to acute intracystic hemorrhage, postlumbar puncture transposition of the mass, or shunt malfunction.
在大多数病例中，胶样囊肿并无临床症状，多为偶尔发现。	In most cases, colloid cysts are asymptomatic and discovered incidentally.
图1. 矢状位和冠状位可见一个小型的胶样囊肿的典型位置。	Figure 1: The typical location of a small colloid cyst in the coronal and sagittal planes.
胶样囊肿与沿三脑室顶嘴侧的脉络丛密切相关。	Colloid cysts are intimately associated with the choroid plexus along the rostral roof of the third ventricle.
尽管囊肿体积不大，但是它会引起严重的梗阻性脑积水。	Despite their small size, they can cause massive obstructive hydrocephalus.
包括胶样囊肿在内的脑室肿瘤的诊断与评估的一般讨论，参考《脑室手术的基本原则》一章。	For a general discussion of diagnosis and evaluation for ventricular tumors, including colloid cysts, see the Principles of Intraventricular Surgery chapter.
胶样囊肿在CT扫描表现为轻度高密度占位，极少包含钙化成分。	Colloid cysts appear as mildly hyperdense lesions on computed tomography (CT) scan and may rarely contain calcifications.
在核磁共振影像中T2W序列，胶样囊肿与白质相比表现为高信号；而在T1W序列中增强无强化表现。	On T2-weighted sequences, they are hyperintense compared to white matter; on T1 images, they lack contrast enhancement.
这一病变一般并不会突然长大；但是，囊内出血会使囊肿扩大。	These lesions do not generally increase significantly in size; however, intracystic hemorrhage can lead to giant cysts.
影像表现上需要和胶样囊肿相鉴别的疾病包括颅咽管瘤、后循环动脉瘤、神经〔型〕囊尾蚴病和椎基底动脉的冗长扩展症。	Radiographic differential diagnosis for a colloid cyst includes a cystic craniopharyngioma, a posterior circulation aneurysm, neurocysticercosis, and vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia.
图2. 胶样囊肿通常不强化但是在T1W表现为均一信号。	Figure 2:  Colloid cysts do not usually enhance but demonstrate T1 isointensity.
在T2W中与白质相比表现为高信号以及一圈短信号环（上行）。	On T2 weighted images, they show hyperintensity compared to white matter with a circumferential rim of hypointensity (upper row).
有时可见一个较大的出血性胶样囊肿（下行）。	A large hemorrhagic colloid cyst is also demonstrated (lower row).
胶样囊肿的治疗策略取决于患者的临床状态。	Management of colloid cysts depends upon the patient’s clinical state.
无症状的病变可以采用定期影像学评估囊肿变化的保守策略。	Asymptomatic lesions may be managed conservatively with routine radiographic evaluation for interval change.
如果患者出现症状，合适的做法是内镜或者显微镜下切除。	If the patient becomes symptomatic, endoscopic or microsurgical resection is appropriate
无症状病变是否需切除仍有强烈争议，因为危及生命的急性脑积水虽然可能出现，但概率极低。	Resection of asymptomatic lesions is a matter of intense controversy because acute life-threatening hydrocephalus is possible, although exceedingly rare.
大型囊肿（d10mm）被认为与脑积水风险增加潜在相关。	Large cysts (10mm in diameter) have been noted to be potentially associated with an increased risk of causing hydrocephalus.
总之，并没有可靠证据支持切除没有导致脑积水的无症状胶样囊肿；笔者推荐继续严密观察随访这些无症状患者。	Overall, there is no reliable indicator for a need to intervene among asymptomatic lesions that are not associated with hydrocephalus; I do recommend observation for these patients.
没有脑积水的头痛并不是干预这类患者的指证。	Headaches, in the absence of hydrocephalus, is not an indication for intervention.
患者出现症状性急性脑积水需要急诊脑室切开。	Patients suffering from symptomatic acute hydrocephalus require emergent ventriculostomy.
笔者常规计划通过非主侧半球间通道来切除囊肿，除非术前影像提示主侧半球脑室显著扩大。	I usually plan to approach the lesion via the nondominant interhemispheric corridor unless the dominant ventricle is substantially larger on preoperative imaging.
合并显著脑积水的患者笔者选择经皮层的管状通道入路切除病变，因为此时经胼胝体入路在两侧扣带回间分离时可能损伤双侧扣带回。	I prefer the use the transcortical transtubular corridor for patients with significant hydrocephalus because intercingulate dissection via the transcallosal route can place both cingula at risk.
然而，轻到中度的脑积水患者脑室额角没有扩大而无法提供足够的操作空间：此时就适合采用经胼胝体入路。	However, mild to moderate hydrocephalus may not provide enough working space within the frontal horn; the transcallosal route is suitable in these instances.
笔者不使用内镜切除胶样囊肿，因为采用这一方法很难始终如一的获得囊壁全切除，这就存在囊肿复发的风险。	I have not used the endoscopic method for resection of colloid cysts because it is difficult to consistently achieve gross total cyst wall removal with this method. A risk of future cyst recurrence persists.
然而，对于有症状的老年患者，内镜切除是明智的选择。	Nonetheless, endoscopic resection is reasonable for older patients with symptomatic cysts.
获取进一步的详细信息请参考《脑室系统解剖》。	Please refer to the Anatomy of the Ventricular System for further details.
经胼胝体入路显微切除胶样囊肿	MICROSURGICAL TRANSCALLOSAL RESECTION OF COLLOID CYSTS
合并轻度脑积水的胶样囊肿理想的手术入路是经胼胝体入路。	The transcallosal approach is ideal for patients suffering from mild hydrocephalus.
图3.多数术者选择患者仰卧位，并采用线性或者马蹄形切口。	Figure 3: Most operators prefer to place the patient in the supine position and use linear or horseshoe incisions.
骨窗2/3位于额部，1/3位于冠状缝后（上图）。	The craniotomy is situated two-thirds in front and one-third behind the coronal suture (top image).
这一体位保持患者中线位于解剖体位。多数神经外科医师认为在深部手术时这一体位极少迷失方向。	This position keeps the midline in the anatomic position, and most neurosurgeons find this configuration less disorienting during the deeper portions of the operation.
笔者选择失状窦平行于地面的侧卧位（下图）。	I prefer to use the lateral head position with the sagittal sinus parallel to the floor (bottom image).
重力能有效牵拉半球，使沿水平面的半球间分离容易操作。	Gravity retraction is effective and interhemispheric dissection can be performed more readily along the horizontal plane.
请参考大脑半球间入路和侧脑室肿瘤章节学习颅骨切开和显露侧脑室的详细细节。	Please refer to the Interhemispheric Craniotomy and Lateral Ventricular Tumors chapters for further details related to craniotomy and exposure of the lateral ventricle.
术中导航有利于选择精确的手术角度和最小化胼胝体切开。	Intraoperative navigation is important for selection of a precise operative trajectory and a minimal callosotomy.
硬膜下手术操作	INTRADURAL PROCEDURE
对于严格位于中线且没有明显外侧扩展的病变理想的手术入路是经胼胝体入路。	Transcallosal approaches are ideal for strictly midline lesions without significant lateral expansion.
术者应该避免损伤内囊膝部，它位于室间孔外侧，并且与室间孔仅有一薄层脑室壁相隔，此处丘纹静脉走向内侧汇入大脑内静脉。	The surgeon should avoid injuring the genu of the internal capsule, located lateral to the foramen of Monro and separated by a thin layer of ventricular capsule where the thalamostriate vein orients medially to anastomose with the internal cerebral vein.
图4.显示大脑前纵裂经胼胝体入路的基本原则。	Figure 4: The basic principles of the anterior interhemispheric transcallosal approach are illustrated.
尽管存在轻至中度的脑积水，笔者在半球间裂分离时使用腰大池引流，最小化减少脑牵拉。	Despite the presence of mild to moderate hydrocephalus, I use lumbar drainage to minimize brain retraction during interhemispheric dissection.
显著的脑积水患者需要侧脑室外引流。	Significant hydrocephalus demands an external ventricular drain.
可根据病灶在脑室的位置适度调整骨窗的前后位置。	The anteroposterior location of the craniotomy may be slightly adjusted based on the location of the lesion within the ventricle.
这一入路到达的范围用绿色阴影展示（插入图）。	The reach of this approach is shaded in green (inset image).
图5.显示囊肿与穹隆柱和大脑内静脉的病理解剖关系。	Figure 5: The pathoanatomy of the cyst in relation to the columns of fornix and internal cerebral veins is demonstrated.
囊肿壁的后缘可能与大脑内静脉黏连。	The posterior capsule of the cyst may be adherent to the internal cerebral veins.
这是位于室间孔后部的手术盲区。	This is an operative blind spot within the posterior aspect of the foramen.
建议小心谨慎的四周分离，没有锐性分离囊壁的话不要从术腔强行拖拉囊肿。	Careful circumdissection is advised, and the capsule should not be pulled out of the resection cavity without its sharp dissection.
图6.根据脉络丛和丘纹静脉静脉的相对关系确定显露了正确的脑室（上图）。	Figure 6: The exposure of the correct ventricle is confirmed based on the relative location of the choroid plexus with respect to the thalamostriate vein (upper illustration).
注意头处于侧卧位，而右侧位于下方。	Note the head is in the lateral position with the right side "down.
整个侧脑室都没有看到囊肿，因为脉络丛和右侧穹隆覆盖了囊壁（下图）。	" The cyst may not be visible upon entering the lateral ventricle because the choroid plexus and the right fornix cover its capsule (lower photo).
笔者通过室间孔轻轻移动脉络膜前部，然后适当电凝使其缩小。	I gently mobilize the anterior aspect of the choroid plexus over the foramen and shrink it with gentle bipolar coagulation.
尽管一开始似乎室间孔内没有足够的操作空间，但是穿刺囊肿并排空凝胶样内容物后将获得足够的显微分离囊壁的空间。	Although initially there seems to be an inadequate working space within the foramen, the puncture of the cyst and thorough evacuation of its gelatinous content will create ample space for microdissection of its capsule.
极少数情况下，经前方一小段脉络丛的分离扩大经室间孔通道可能需要从丘纹静脉上切断透明隔静脉。	In rare circumstances, the septal vein may be disconnected from the thalamostriate vein to expand the transforaminal corridor via a small anterior transchoroidal dissection.
这一操作可避免过度骚扰穹隆。	This maneuver obviates the need to excessive manipulation of the fornix.
图7.通过移动和电凝减少脉络膜前部（上图）。	Figure 7: The anterior aspect of the choroid plexus is reduced through its mobilization and coagulation (upper illustration).
避免固定牵拉而采用动态牵拉。	Dynamic retraction is used and fixed retractors are voided.
通常切除胶囊肿只需要切开1-1.5cm的胼胝体（中间的术中图片）。	Only ~1-1.5 cm of callosotomy is typically necessary for resection of a colloid cyst (middle intraoperative photo).
疝入术野的透明隔（下图-蓝色箭头）显示对侧脑室没有交通性脑积水。	The herniation of the septum pellucidum into the operative field (lower intraoperative photo-blue arrow) indicates noncommunicating hydrocephalus of the contralateral ventricle.
笔者穿透透明隔减轻对侧脑室压力，减少笔者术野空间内的透明隔。	I fenestrate the septum pellucidum to relieve the pressure in the contralateral chamber, reducing the septum out of my operative space.
图8.打开囊壁后积极吸除内容物进行囊肿减压，然后环形分离显露和移动囊壁。	Figure 8: Opening of the cyst wall and aggressive suctioning of its internal contents is pertinent for cyst decompression, exposure and mobilization of its capsule during circumdissection.
图9.囊壁完全减压后，首先很容易分离前方，接着是外侧，最后沿三脑室顶从脉络丛和其他血管神经结构上分离囊肿后壁。	Figure 9: The capsule is thoroughly deflated and is readily dissected first anteriorly, next laterally, and finally posteriorly from the choroid plexus and other neurovascular structures along the roof of the third ventricle.
囊壁主要沿脉络裂黏连。	The capsule is primarily adherent along the choroidal fissure.
图10.可以电凝囊壁使其缩小。	Figure 10: The capsule may be coagulated to shrink its size.
应该不惜代价避免骚扰穹隆。	The fornix should not be manipulated at all cost.
吸引器不应该损伤周围正常的结构。	The suction device should not injure the surrounding normal structures.
笔者整块移除囊壁，而不是分块切除。	I remove the capsule en bloc, not piecemeal.
图11.囊壁应该在直视下用锐性显微分离的方式从脉络丛和大脑内静脉上切断。	Figure 11: The capsule is disconnected from the choroid plexus and internal cerebral veins using sharp microdissection under direct vision.
脉络丛上的出血通常较为明显；轻轻的电凝并且大量冲洗避免正常结构的附带损伤。	Some bleeding from the plexus is usually evident; gentle coagulation and ample irrigation avoid collateral injury to nonpathologic structures.
如果术前明显的脑积水存在，应该穿透透明隔沟通双侧脑室。	The septum pellucidum may be fenestrated if significant preoperative hydrocephalus was present.
大量冲洗脑室排空一切残渣并控制小血管渗血。	The ventricular cavities are generously irrigated to evacuate any debris and control minor bleeding.
笔者在切除胶样囊肿后不留置脑室引流管。	I do not leave a ventricular catheter in place after resection of colloid cysts.
通常采用简洁的方式来处理。	This procedure is usually pristine.
然而，如果患者术前需要放置脑室外引流，术后继续保持引流并逐步拔除。	However, if the patient required preoperative placement of an external ventricular drain, the drain is left in the ventricle and weaned off postoperatively.
脑室肿瘤的术后管理的详细讨论参考脑室手术的基本原则一章。	For a detailed discussion of postoperative care of patients with ventricular tumors, see the Principles of Intraventricular Surgery chapter.
囊肿的早期减压、脑室壁及穹隆的轻柔处理是良好结局的保证。	Early decompression of the cyst and gentle handling of the fornix and ventricular walls secure optimal outcomes.
在没有彻底环形游离之前不要妄想拖出囊肿。	The cyst should not be pulled out before its thorough circumdissection.
眶颧入路开颅术	Orbitozygomatic Craniotomy
眶颧入路（orbitozygomatic craniotomy，OZ）在翼点入路的基础上，不同程度地切除眶上缘/壁、眶外侧缘/壁和颧骨。	The orbitozygomatic craniotomy (OZ) involves an expansion of the pterional approach through osteotomy of various sections of the superior/lateral orbital rim/roof and zygoma.
这些新增的骨质去除，扩展了额下径路的视野，且减少了脑牵拉的必要，以获得前、中颅窝底、鞍旁及脚间池区域的宽阔暴露。	This additional bone removal broadens the subfrontal trajectory and minimizes the need for brain retraction to access the floor of the anterior and middle skull base as well as the parasellar and interpeduncular spaces.
该入路可提供从下至上的卓越视野和手术空间，同时也是一种可沿多方向延伸、具备高灵活度和自由度的手术径路。	It also allows an enhanced inferior-to-superior operative trajectory and working angles with flexible multidirectional degrees of operative freedom.
骨质切除范围的不同形成了眶颧入路的多种术式变异。	Multiple variations of the OZ have been described involving different amounts of bone work.
最常用也最为实用的改良术式，即“单骨瓣（one-piece）”和“双骨瓣（two-piece）”法眶上骨切开术（supraorbital osteotomy），而不过多地切除颧骨。	The most widely used and practical modifications are the “one” and “two-piece” supraorbital osteotomies with limited resection of the zygoma.
这些改良术式均包含有眶顶、眶缘以及颧骨额突的切除。	These modified variations involve mobilization of the orbital roof and rim as well the frontal process of zygoma.
“单骨瓣”法中，额颞开颅和眶上骨切开术形成一整块骨瓣。	In the one-piece osteotomy, the frontotemporal craniotomy and supraorbital osteotomy are completed as one bone flap.
“双骨瓣”法则是在完成传统的翼点开颅后，再另外进行眶上骨切开术。	In the two-piece osteotomy, a traditional pterional craniotomy is first elevated, followed by the supraorbital osteotomy.
单骨瓣法额颞开颅加眶上骨切开术（即所谓的改良眶颧开颅（modified OZ））损伤最小，且具备其他所有眶颧开颅术式的主要优点，因此本文将针对这一种术式进行阐述。	The one-piece frontotemporal craniotomy and supraorbital osteotomy (referred to as modified OZ) is the least disruptive alternative and provides most of the advantages of all the other OZ variations and will be reviewed here.
图1：如图所示为单骨瓣法改良眶颧入路行眶骨切开术的基本步骤。	Figure 1: Shown are fundamental osteotomy locations for the one-piece modified OZ.
第一步切割（左图）跨过眶缘。	The first osteotomy (left image) cuts across the orbital rim.
第二步（中图）将颧骨额突从颧骨上离断。最后一步（右图）切开眶顶至关键孔。	The second osteotomy (middle image) disconnects the frontal process of the zygoma, and the last cut (right image) is across the roof of the orbit through an expanded keyhole.
关键孔的“关键”之处，在于其须同时暴露眶骨膜和额叶硬膜，这是完成后续开颅的关键。	The “key” location of the keyhole for exposing the orbit and frontal dura is important for planning subsequent osteotomies.
上述切开的骨性结构包括眶缘、颧骨和眶顶。	These bony cuts lead to disarticulation of the orbital rim, zygoma, and orbital roof.
不同学者对该入路的不同描述，常常使得年轻医师感到困惑。	My colleagues have generously described many modifications of this skull base approach, but these descriptions often confuse novice surgeons.
笔者将尽可能简洁明了地展示这一用途广泛的颅底入路，并着重阐明其最佳适应症。	I will attempt to simplify this versatile skull base approach with a special emphasis on its selective and judicious applications.
改良眶颧入路的适应症	Indications for the Modified Orbitozygomatic Osteotomy
改良眶颧入路可广泛应用于各种位于眶尖、床突旁、鞍旁、海绵窦、脚间池和上段斜坡区域的血管及肿瘤性病变。	Modifications of the OZ have been widely used for both vascular and neoplastic lesions within the orbital apex, paraclinoid and parasellar regions, cavernous sinus as well the interpeduncular and upper paraclivus territories.
从颅底向上显著延伸的占位，可通过眶颧入路绝佳的从下至上的视角和兼顾内外的操作空间来暴露，并可大大减少对额叶的牵拉。	Cranial base masses with tremendous superior extension can benefit from the expanded inferior-to-superior operative trajectory and from the medial-to-lateral operative working angles of the OZ pathway; OZ mitigates the vector of retraction on the frontal lobes.
笔者提倡单骨瓣法改良眶颧入路。	I recommend the use of one-piece modified OZ.
完全性离断颧骨的术式中，对颞部颧弓的离断，并不增加多少暴露。	A complete zygomatic osteotomy of the temporal portion of the zygomatic arch does not significantly add to the exposure.
事实上，切除颞部的颧骨对大多数病变来说是多余的，且更易引起术后容貌缺损的问题。	In fact, temporal zygomatic osteotomy can be redundant for exposure of most lesions and increases the risk of cosmetic deformity.
对于那些能通过扩大翼点入路暴露的病变，笔者一般不使用眶颧入路。	I do not routinely use the OZ for lesions that can be exposed through the extended pterional craniotomy.
扩大翼点入路包括了对眶顶和蝶骨翼外侧部的广泛切除，可扩展标准翼点入路的手术视野和操作空间。	The extended pterional craniotomy requires aggressive drilling of the roof of the orbit and lateral sphenoid wing; these two maneuvers expand the reach of the standard pterional corridor.
笔者将下述情况列为改良眶颧入路的特定适应症：向上突入三脑室区域的鞍旁病变，以及位于眶内后三分之一的病变。	I selectively use the modified OZ for parasellar lesions extending superiorly into the third ventricular space and orbital lesions within the posterior one-third of the orbit.
具体来说，例如巨大的鞍旁脑膜瘤、高位基底动脉尖动脉瘤、眶内后部脑膜瘤/海绵状血管瘤。	More specifically, I use this approach for giant parasellar meningiomas or “high-riding” basilar apex aneurysms, as well as posterior intraorbital meningiomas/cavernous hemangiomas.
该入路也适合海绵窦内占位。	The lesions within the cavernous sinus can also benefit from the modified OZ.
由此可见，该入路适用范围相对较窄且较为特定。	As you can see, the list is relatively short and selective.
图2：一例巨大的内侧型蝶骨嵴脑膜瘤（上图），经改良眶颧入路完整切除（中图）。	Figure 2: This large medial sphenoid wing meningioma (top photos) was resected via the modified OZ (middle photos).
该例肿瘤向上显著生长，因此需要通过切除眶顶骨质来获得从下至上的手术视野。	The significant superior extension of the tumor required a steep inferior-to-superior intradural operative trajectory afforded through the orbital trim osteotomy.
同样地，另一例三脑室型颅咽管瘤（下图）也通过相同的入路经终板切除。	Similarly, this third ventricular craniopharyngioma (bottom images) was removed via the same approach through the lamina terminalis.
脑膜瘤可导致眶顶和蝶骨翼外侧部的骨质增生，术前影像学需评估这一情况。	Meningiomas can lead to hyperostosis of the roof of the orbit and lateral sphenoid wing; this finding should be evaluated on preoperative imaging.
对这一类型脑膜瘤行眶颧开颅时，眶顶的切开须在直视下完成。	If the modified OZ is performed for resection of sphenoid wing and orbital meningiomas, the osteotomy along the orbital roof should be performed under direct vision and not blindly.
由于眶顶骨质异常增厚，可出现难以控制的眶顶、眶缘骨折，甚至可累及视神经管而导致视神经损伤。	Due to the increased thickness of the orbital roof, uncontrolled fracture of the roof and rim may extend as far as the optic canal and lead to optic nerve injury.
当骨折累及蝶窦和筛窦时，还可出现术后脑脊液漏。	The fracture can also involve the walls of the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses, generating postoperative CSF leakage.
图3：须避免在未完全离断骨性连接、且未直视眶顶或蝶骨翼外侧部的情况下，盲目地掀起眶颧或翼点骨瓣。	Figure 3: Aggressive elevation of the orbitozygomatic or pterional bone flap without its complete disconnection under direct vision along the orbital roof or lateral sphenoid wing should be avoided.
强行折断异常增生的蝶骨翼外侧部，可导致骨折线意外累及视神经管（左图）或筛窦（右图），出现相应的视神经损伤和术后脑脊液漏。	Attempts to blindly fracture the bone flap at its margin at the hyperostotic lateral sphenoid wing in case of sphenoid wing meningiomas can lead to an inadvertent extension of the fracture into the optic canal (left) or ethmoid sinus (right) with resultant optic nerve injury or unrecognized postoperative CSF leak.
笔者建议行腰大池引流以降低硬膜张力，从而在眶颧入路中更好地保护硬膜和脑组织。	I consider the use of a lumbar drain since dural decompression can protect the dura and the brain during OZ osteotomies.
术前影像学还需评估额窦向外侧延伸的情况。	The lateral extent of the frontal sinuses should be studied on preoperative imaging.
但即使有开放额窦的风险，也要保证足够的开颅范围。	The risk of the entry into the frontal sinus should not compromise adequate exposure.
必须深入地掌握前颅底的相应解剖。	An in-depth understanding of the corresponding anatomy of the anterior skull base is pertinent.
图4：面神经额支所在的层面位于脂肪垫的浅部，因此可使用筋膜下技术将面神经额支翻开，再将颞肌单独翻开（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	Figure 4:  The anatomy of the frontalis branches of the facial nerve within the superficial fascia of the fat pad is shown.  The subfascial technique is used to reflect these branches in a separate layer than that of the temporalis muscle (image courtesy AL Rhoton, Jr).
关于筋膜下和筋膜间技术保护面神经额支的相关内容，请参见《翼点入路》章节。	For further details about the subfascial and interfascial techniques for mobilizing the facial nerve branches, please refer to the chapter on Pterional Craniotomy.
图5：改良眶颧入路移除的骨质包括眶缘、眶顶前部及颧骨额突的一部分。	Figure 5: The modified OZ involves removal of the orbital rim, anterior orbital roof and part of the frontal process of zygoma.
骨质切割范围可延伸至眶下裂，但已很少应用。	This osteotomy may be extended to the level of the inferior orbital fissure, but this is rarely necessary.
额颧缝（蓝箭）大约为眶顶水平（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	The frontozygomatic suture (blue arrow) approximates the level of the orbital roof (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图6：与眶颧入路相关的前外侧颅底的骨性解剖（左上图）。	Figure 6: Bony anatomy of the anterolateral skull base (left upper image) as it relates to the OZ is demonstrated.
注意从眶内侧面观察到的关键孔与额颧缝的关系（上右图和下左图）。	Note the location of the keyhole relative to frontozygomatic suture from inside the orbit (right upper and left lower images).
翼点入路中的“关键孔”则位于眶颧入路中的McCarty关键孔的上方，前者仅需暴露额叶硬膜，而后者需同时暴露眶骨膜和额叶硬膜（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	The pterional “keyhole” that exposes only the frontal dura is more superiorly situated than the real McCarty keyhole used for OZ that exposes both the orbit and the frontal dura (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图7：关键孔周围的骨缝解剖（左上图）。	Figure 7: The osteology around the area of the keyhole (left upper image).
笔者研究发现，为同时显露眶骨膜以及被眶顶隔开的额叶硬膜，最佳的关键孔定位为A1点（右上图）（此处与所引原文观点不同；原文中Rhoton等作者认为最佳定位点为B1；译者注）。	I find the location of A1 (right upper image) as the most likely place for the keyhole to expose the orbit and the frontal dura separated by the orbital roof.
注意眶顶与垂直虚线之间呈一夹角（左下图）。	Note the orientation of the orbital roof in relation to the vertical hashed lines (left lower image).
眶顶的厚度和倾斜角度存在变异。	The orbital roof has variable thickness and orientation.
需熟悉其典型的倾斜角度，以便在术中保证关键孔能同时暴露额叶硬膜和眶骨膜（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	Its typical oblique orientation should be kept in mind during expansion of the keyhole so that both the frontal dura and the periorbita are exposed (right lower image)(images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图8：对这一起始关键孔的精准定位，以同时暴露眶骨膜和额叶硬膜，是之后顺利完成眶颧和眶上/额眶骨切开术的关键步骤。	Figure 8: Precise and accurate placement of the initial keyhole to expose the orbit and the frontal dura is the most important step for appropriate and efficient execution of the orbitozygomatic and supraorbital/fronto-orbital craniotomies.
该孔的中心通常位于额颧缝（黑箭）上方7mm、后方5mm的位置。	The center of the keyhole is usually 7 mm superior and 5 mm posterior to the frontozygomatic suture (black arrow).
图9：单骨瓣法眶颧开颅的具体步骤。	Figure 9: The steps in execution of a one-piece modified OZ are shown.
步骤3-7使用不带底座的B1铣刀。	The osteotomies corresponding to the steps 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 are performed using a B1 drill bit without a footplate.
步骤8使用骨凿。（图片引自Balasingam, V and colleagues. Modified osteoplastic orbitozygomatic craniotomy. J Neurosurg 102:940-44, 2005）	Step 8 is done using a thin osteotome (images reproduced with permission from: Balasingam, V and colleagues. Modified osteoplastic orbitozygomatic craniotomy. J Neurosurg 102:940-44, 2005).
图10：眶颧入路的硬膜内暴露，可见前颅底和中颅底广阔的手术视野（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）。	Figure 10: Intradural exposure after an orbitozygomatic craniotomy is shown. Note the expanded operative view toward the anterior and middle skull base (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
改良眶颧开颅/入路	Principles of Bone Work for Modified OZ
患者采取平卧位，根据病变的具体位置，将头部旋转20-40°。	The patient is positioned supine with the head turned 20-40 degrees, depending on the specific location of the lesion.
越是靠近中线的病变，头部旋转的角度越小。	The closer the lesion to the midline, the less the head is turned.
颈部略微伸展，头顶倾向地面，使得颧隆突位于术野最高点。	The patient’s neck is slightly extended and the head is tilted toward the floor so that the malar eminence is the highest point of the field.
这样的体位有助于利用重力效应使额叶抬离眶顶。	This maneuver allows gravity retraction to mobilize the frontal lobes away from the orbital roof.
关于手术室配置的相关细节请参见《翼点入路》章节。	Please refer to the Pterional Craniotomy chapter for more details about the operating room setup.
越是靠近基底部的病变，如眼动脉段和后交通动脉段动脉瘤以及海绵窦占位，头越是少伸展而多旋转，使得眶外侧嵴（原文为orbital ridge；该术语少有应用，同supra orbital ridge，后者又同superciliary arches或eye brow ridge，即眉弓；然而此处为眉弓可能性不大，译者认为更可能为眶外侧缘的骨嵴，即额骨颧突-颧骨额突区域；译者注）位于最上方；	More basal pathologies such as ophthalmic and posterior communicating artery aneurysms as well as cavernous sinus masses require little head deflection and greater head rotation so that the orbital ridge is left in the superior plane.
相反地，如大脑中动脉和颈内动脉分叉部动脉瘤以及向上侵犯的鞍旁肿瘤，头尽量多伸展而少旋转，使得颧隆突位于最上方。	On the other hand, middle cerebral and carotid bifurcation artery aneurysms as well as suprasellar tumors with more superior extension benefit from a greater head deflection and minimal head rotation, allowing the malar prominence to stay in the superior plane.
头皮切口始于耳屏前方1cm的颧弓水平。切口在发际线以内，弧形越过中线，终于对侧瞳中线与发际线的交点。	The incision begins 1 cm anterior to the tragus at the level of the zygomatic arch and stays behind the hairline, curving forward across the midline to the point where the contralateral midpupillary line meets the hairline.
切口长度不足将造成皮瓣和颞肌翻开受限，从而不利于颧骨额突和眶缘的暴露。	Shorter incisions would greatly limit the reflection of the scalp flap and temporalis muscle, and will compromise the exposure of the frontal zygoma and orbital rim.
图11：切口基本沿发际线，与颞上线相平行，无需向后过多延伸。	Figure 11: The incision essentially follows the hairline, stays perpendicular to the superior temporal line, without significant posterior extension.
颧弓下方切开不超过1cm，以免损伤面神经分支。	To avoid injury to the branches of the facial nerve, I do not extend the incision more than 1 cm below the zygomatic arch.
如果将来有对侧手术的可能性，或患者已有对侧手术的切口疤痕，则尽量调整切口形态，使总体类似于冠状切口。	If there is a potential need for a future contralateral procedure or if the patient already owns a contralateral scar, the incision may be modified to allow for its convergence into an overall bicoronal type of incision.
切皮时，用骨膜剥离子将帽状腱膜与骨膜隔开。	A flat dissector separates the galea from the pericranium as the knife incises the skin.
图12：向下锐性切开头皮，深度至骨膜和颞肌筋膜。	Figure 12: The skin incision is carried down sharply to the level of the pericranium and temporalis fascia.
尽可能地保留颞浅动脉的后支。	The posterior branch of the superficial temporal artery is preserved whenever possible.
颞浅动脉的额支可电凝后切断。	The frontal branch of this artery is coagulated and divided.
图13：于帽状腱膜和骨膜层之间分离皮瓣，保留带血管蒂的骨膜瓣以备关颅时之需。	Figure 13: The plane between the galea and the pericranium is developed in case a vascularized pericranial flap is needed at the time of closure.
皮瓣向前牵开，与颞肌筋膜相分离。	The scalp flap is reflected anteriorly and is separated from the temporalis fascia.
可用10#皮刀的刀刃进行帽状腱膜和骨膜之间的分离。	The belly of the #10 scalpel blade may be used to separate the pericranium from the galea.
脂肪垫已被显露。	The fat pad is exposed.
图14：沿帽状腱膜和骨膜之间的间隙分离，直至暴露出帽状腱膜下脂肪层，其内走行有面神经的额颞支（额支）。	Figure 14: The plane between the galea and the pericranium is developed until the subgaleal fat pad containing the frontotemporal (frontalis) branches of the facial nerve becomes visible.
这些面神经的分支位于筋膜间脂肪垫以浅的间隙内，并非位于筋膜间脂肪垫中。	These branches are located in the superficial fascia of the fat pad, not within the fat pad.
因此有下述两种翻折脂肪垫的技术，用以保护这些面神经分支：	There are therefore two techniques for reflecting the fat pad without injuring these branches:
1.筋膜间技术：沿筋膜间脂肪垫和颞肌筋膜深层之间，将脂肪垫和颞肌筋膜浅层一同翻折。	Interfascial technique: The superficial temporal fascia is reflected anteriorly along with the fat pad via dissection underneath the fat pad but superficial to the deep temporal fascia.
2.筋膜下技术：将颞肌筋膜浅层、筋膜间脂肪垫和颞肌筋膜深层一同翻折（这是笔者偏好的做法，因其对面神经的保护更可靠）	Subfascial technique: The superficial temporal fascia is reflected anteriorly along with the fat pad and the deep temporal fascia, all as one layer (this is my preferred method because it offers maximal protection for the facial nerve branches).
筋膜间脂肪垫通常可在颧骨额突及眶缘的后方2.5-3m处显露。	This fat pad is usually located 2.5 to 3 cm posterior to the frontal process of the zygoma and the orbital rim.
使用Bovie单极电刀切开颞肌筋膜深层，采用筋膜下技术翻折脂肪垫。	Bovie electrocautery is used to cut the deep temporal fascia and reflect the fat pad in the subfascial manner.
图16：骨膜下分离暴露颧骨。	Figure 16: Subperiosteal exposure of the zygoma is shown.
颞肌筋膜深层向前与额骨颧突的骨膜层相延续。	The deep temporalis fascia is fused along its anterior edge with the periosteum of the frontal zygomatic process.
因此，筋膜下分离在颧骨额部区域自然转变为骨膜下分离，继而完全暴露出眶上缘和额骨颧突。	The subfascial dissection is continued anteriorly with subperiosteal dissection over the frontal zygomatic bone to achieve full exposure of the superior orbital rim and frontal zygomatic process.
额骨前部的骨膜也继续向前行骨膜下分离、翻开，直至显露出眶上神经和眶上切迹。	The pericranium over the frontal bone is also reflected anteriorly toward the orbital rim, and subperiosteal dissection is continued until the supraorbital nerve and notch are identified.
图17：继续行骨膜下分离直至眶缘和眶顶前部的下方。	Figure 17: The superiosteal or subpericranial dissection is carried around the orbital rim and underneath the anterior roof of the orbit.
进入眶缘的额骨及颧骨骨膜即延续为眶骨膜。	Beyond the rim, the periosteum of the zygomatic and frontal bones blends into the periorbita.
钝性剥离眶上切迹外侧部的眶骨膜。	Blunt dissection is used to free the periorbita from the orbital rim lateral to the supraorbital notch.
眶骨膜常黏着于额颧缝，因此先对此处进行松解。	The periorbita is often adherent at the frontozygomatic suture.
随后对眶下裂至眶上切迹之间的眶骨膜行广泛的钝性剥离，直至形成明显的眶骨膜下间隙。	This attachment is dissected first, and then a blunt dissector is used to sweep over the periorbita from the inferior orbital fissure toward the supraorbital notch until the subperiosteal plane is well defined.
通常情况下，钝性剥离至眶内2-3cm就足够了。	Usually, 2 to 3 cm of dissection into the orbit is sufficient.
若有眶内脂肪从破损的眶骨膜中涌出，可用双极电凝使其回缩。	If the periorbita is disrupted, intraorbital fat that herniates through the defect may be shrunken using bipolar electrocautery.
眶骨膜破损可导致术后眶周淤肿更为显著。	Disruption of the periorbita leads to a more pronounced postoperative periorbital edema and bruising.
图18：常可见眶上神经从眶上切迹穿出，可将其从眶上神经沟内轻轻钝性游离出。	Figure 18: The supraorbital nerve is often embedded within its notch but may be mobilized out of its groove using gentle blunt dissection.
然而，少数情况下，眶上神经从眶上神经孔内穿出。	However, the nerve rarely owns its own foramen.
此时可用带有侧仞的细小钻头，绕眶上神经切开一圈，使其连同其骨孔一同向前移位，而不损伤神经（插图）。	If such a foramen is present, a small caliber, straight, side-cutting drill bit is used to cut a halo of the orbital rim around the supraorbital nerve to allow for anterior mobilization of the nerve with its foramen without injury to the nerve (inset image).
游离眶上神经后，即可轻易地并将其连同骨膜及眶骨膜辦一起向前翻折。	Once the nerve is released, it can be easily reflected inferiorly along with the pericranial flap and periorbita.
眶上神经周围的骨质切口，也可用于开颅时铣刀底座的取出。	The small osteotomy around the nerve may also be used as the exit point for the footplate of the craniotome at the time of the craniotomy.
图19：随后沿颞上线切开颞肌，在后方则是平行于头皮切口方向切开肌肉。	Figure 19: Next, the temporalis muscle is incised along its insertion at the superior temporal line and posteriorly parallel to the scalp incision line.
在颞上线处保留一条肌筋膜带，以便关颅时修复颞肌。	A myofascial cuff is left in place at the superior temporal line to allow repair of the muscle upon closure.
随后使用骨膜剥离子对颞肌行骨膜下分离，方向应从下往上，即从颧弓向颞上线进行。	The muscle is then elevated in a subperiosteal manner using a periosteal elevator, starting at the zygomatic arch and working toward the superior temporal line.
这样的逆向颞肌分离法，有利于更好地保护肌肉深面的真性骨膜层（subperiosteal layer），而该层内走行有支配颞肌的颞深动脉和颞深神经，因此该技术可减少术后颞肌萎缩。	This retrograde muscle dissection may permit a better preservation of the subperiosteal layer containing the deep temporal arteries and nerves nourishing the muscle, potentially minimizing its postoperative atrophy.
牵开颞肌的方向为向下而非向前，以最大程度地获得额下操作的空间。	The muscle is then retracted inferiorly, and not anteriorly, to maximize its mobilization away from the subfrontal working zone.
图20：眶颧开颅需钻两个骨孔。	Figure 20: Two burr holes are needed to create an orbitozygomatic bone flap.
必要时可钻更多的骨孔以保证硬膜的完整。	Additional burr holes can be added, if necessary, to preserve the integrity of the dura.
第一个钻孔位置恰位于颞上线尾侧、靠近骨面后缘处。	The first burr hole is placed immediately caudal to the superior temporal line close to the posterior margin of the bony exposure.
注意使用鱼钩牵开器最大程度地牵开软组织；颞肌向下而非向前牵开。	Note the use of fishhooks to maximally mobilize the soft tissues; the temporalis muscle is mobilized inferiorly rather than anteriorly.
图21：必须正确定位关键孔并按正确的角度进行打磨，才能透过该孔同时显露眶骨膜和额叶硬膜。	Figure 21: It is imperative to place the keyhole at the appropriate location and drill at the correct angle to expose both the periorbital and the frontal dura through the expanded burr hole.
准确完成此步骤，是顺利进行单骨瓣法眶颧开颅的关键，同时亦可避免关键孔区过多的骨质缺损带来的容貌缺损问题。	Accurate completion of the keyhole facilitates execution of the one-piece orbitozygomatic craniotomy and prevents excessive bone loss in the keyhole region and resultant cosmetic deformity.
关键孔置于颞窝内，大致定位于额颧缝（黄箭）上方7mm、后方5mm处。	The keyhole is made in the temporal fossa, about 7-mm superior and 5-mm posterior to the frontozygomatic suture (yellow arrow).
钻头方向与颞骨所在平面呈45°。	The shaft of the drill is held at a 45 degree angle measured from the plane of the temporal bone.
通过该孔的后上半可显露额叶硬膜，前下半可显露眶骨膜（插图），两部分由眶顶分隔。	The supraposterior half of this burr hole exposes the dura of the anterior fossa, while the anteroinferior part exposes the periorbita (inset). The roof of the orbit divides these two compartments within the keyhole.
图22：使用带有底座的铣刀进行开颅。	Figure 22: The craniotome with the footplate attachment is now used for the craniotomy.
第一个颅骨切开可始于眶上切迹，此处在之前游离眶上神经时已被切开（上图）。	The first bony cut starts within the supraorbital notch, where the small osteotomy was previously performed to release the nerve (top).
但更为常用的另一种做法是，从颞部的骨孔向上沿着颞上线轮廓向前。	Alternatively and more commonly, the temporal burr hole may be used as the starting point. This cut stays superior to and follows the contour of the superior temporal line.
如果之前游离眶上神经时未曾在眶上切迹处切开，则可用带侧仞的钻头于眶上切迹外侧切割以切开眶缘。	If the supraorbital notch does not require drilling to release the nerve, the orbital rim osteotomy is conducted lateral to the notch using a side-cutting drill bit (bottom).
图23：继续用带底座的铣刀进行下部开颅。	Figure 23: The footplate attachment is also used to create the inferior portion of the craniotomy.
从颞部骨孔向下，随后向前切割，直至底座的突出部被蝶骨大翼阻挡（步骤1）。	Starting at the temporal burr hole, the craniotome is directed inferiorly and then anteriorly until the progress of the footplate is stopped by the sphenoid wing.
该处可原位转动铣刀（步骤2），扩大骨切割线末端，以腾出空间，从硬膜外间隙内取出铣刀底座（步骤3）。	At this point, the drill is “turned around on itself” (steps 1 and 2) to expand the last few millimeters of the bony cut, creating enough space so that the footplate can be removed from the epidural space (step 3).
图24：接下来，将带有底座的铣刀替换为带有侧仞的B1直切割钻头，进行第一步眶骨切开术。	Figure 24: Next, I replace the footplate with a straight side-cutting B1 drill bit to perform the first orbital osteotomy.
这一切割始于关键孔的眶部，沿着眶外侧壁、跨过蝶骨大翼，终于之前颞部开颅的骨切割线末端。	This cut involves connecting the orbital portion of the keyhole to the previous exit point of the craniotome via an osteotomy along the lateral wall of the orbit and sphenoid wing.
图25：随后用同样的直切割钻头，于额颧缝下方2cm处横断颧骨额突。	Figure 25: Next, the same straight side-cutting drill bit is used to cut the zygomatic process about 2 centimeters inferior to the frontozygomatic suture.
用脑压板保护眶内容物。	A spatula protects the intraorbital contents.
上述两步切割使得颧骨额突与颧骨相离断。	The last two osteotomies disconnect the frontal zygomatic process.
图26：将眶骨膜与眶外侧壁进一步分离，为下一步切割做好准备。	Figure 26: The periorbita is further dissected away from the lateral orbital wall and the roof in preparation for the next osteotomy.
图27：用小而薄的骨凿，从之前游离眶上神经的眶缘切口，由内向外，沿着眶顶完成最后一步眶骨切开术。	Figure 27: A thin, small osteotome is used to perform the final osteotomy along the orbital roof from medial to lateral direction, starting at the osteotomy that was used to release the supraorbital nerve.
眶顶骨质可极为菲薄，因此避免使用蛮力捶打骨凿。	The bone of the orbital roof can be very thin, and excessive force while using the mallet should be avoided.
图28：另一种完成眶骨切开术的方法是，用相同的骨凿对着关键孔凿开眶顶。	Figure 28: An alternative method for completing the orbital roof osteotomy involves the use of a small thin osteotome to cut across the roof of the orbit through the keyhole.
用两块脑棉分别保护前下方的眶骨膜和后上方的额叶硬膜，以免受到骨凿损伤。	Two cotton patties may be used to protect the frontal dura posteriorly and the periorbita inferiorly from the osteotome.
图29：上述开颅及眶骨切开术完成之后，需游离这一完整的额颞眶颧骨瓣并小心掀开。	Figure 29: Once the craniotomy as well as the zygomatic and orbital osteotomies are complete, the one-piece modified OZ bone flap is free and can be carefully elevated.
若开放额窦，则需彻底剥除其内黏膜并以肌肉和骨腊填塞封闭，关颅时可用带蒂骨膜瓣加以覆盖。	If the frontal sinus is entered, its mucosa should be thoroughly curetted away/removed and the sinus packed with muscle and bone wax. The vascularized pericranial flap may be used for its coverage during the closure stage.
图30：掀去骨瓣后，使用带有侧仞的B1直切割钻头进一步切除眶顶前外侧部的蝶骨小翼骨质。	Figure 30: Once the cranio-orbital bone flap is elevated, additional bone from the anterolateral aspect of the orbital roof is removed and the lesser sphenoid wing is further reduced. A straight side-cutting B1 drill bit is used for this purpose.
需注意保护眶内容物。	The orbital contents are protected.
在关颅时，切下来的这一小块眶顶骨质可无需还纳。	This small piece of orbital roof may not need to be replaced during closure.
图31：根据病变的具体需要，可进一步切除更多的骨质。	Figure 31: Additional bony removal along the subfrontal corridor can be tailored based on the location of the lesion.
对于那些与颈内动脉近端关系密切的颅底病变，有必要行硬膜外前床突切除术，	An extradural clinoidectomy may be necessary for lesions round the proximal internal carotid artery along the skull base.
该操作可在处理肿瘤前，早期完成视神经管减压。	The clinoidectomy provides an early decompression of the optic nerve at its foramen before the adjacent compressive tumor is manipulated.
关于该部分的详细内容，请参阅《硬膜外前床突切除术》章节。	For more details regarding extradural clinoidectomy, please refer to its dedicated chapter in the Cranial Approaches volume.
图32：进一步剥离前颅底和中颅底的硬膜，以暴露蝶骨小翼。	Figure 32: The dura is further dissected away from the floor of the anterior and middle fossa to expose the lesser sphenoid wing.
可使用牵开器保护额叶并利于后续暴露。	A retractor may be used to protect the frontal lobe and facilitate further exposure.
使用咬骨钳或切割钻切除蝶骨小翼。	The lesser sphenoid wing is removed using rongeurs or a cutting burr.
腰大池脑脊液引流可明显有助于此处及之后对硬膜的剥离。	CSF drainage through the lumbar drain can significantly facilitate mobilization of the dura at this and later stage(s).
图33：对蝶骨小翼的进一步切除可显露出眶上裂，并可进一步向内侧剥离硬膜。	Figure 33: After further reduction of the lesser sphenoid wing, the superior orbital fissure is identified and the dura is detached further medially.
此处将遇到脑膜眶带（meningo-orbital band）。	At this point, the meningo-orbital band is encountered.
这一额颞部硬膜返折，实为中颅窝硬膜（骨膜层；译者注）与眶骨膜在眶上裂处的连接。	This frontotemporal dural fold represents the connection between the dura of the middle fossa and periorbita through the superior orbital fissure.
脑膜眶带的存在，阻碍了向内侧进一步剥离硬膜，因此需将其切开约5mm，以进一步牵开额颞叶硬膜来显露前床突。	This band prevents further stripping of the dura medially and may be cut for ~5 mm to facilitate exposure of the anterior clinoid process through retraction of the frontotemporal dura.
脑膜眶带的外侧5mm可使用双极电凝和剪刀安全地切开。	The lateral 5 mm of the meningo-orbital band can be safely coagulated with bipolar electrocautery and divided using heavy microscissors.
进一步钝性剥离海绵窦外侧壁的外层，有助于充分显露前床突的内侧部。	Further blunt refection of the external dural fold of the cavernous sinus renders a wider exposure of the medial clinoid process.
图34：松解脑膜眶带后，可进一步沿着眶上裂钝性剥离硬膜，以充分显露前床突内侧部。	Figure 34: After the meningo-orbital band is released, further dural detachment along the superior orbital fissure can be performed to expand the exposure of the anterior clinoid process.
在颞叶侧，可分离出颞叶硬膜（脑膜层，即海绵窦外侧壁的外层；译者注）与海绵窦硬膜（海绵窦外侧壁的内层；译者注）之间的间隙。	On the temporal side, a plane between the temporal dura and the cavernous sinus dura can be developed.
沿此间隙，可将颞叶硬膜从海绵窦前部和眶尖区剥离，从而更有利于前床突内侧部的显露。	The temporal dura is peeled away from the anterior aspect of the cavernous sinus and the orbital apex. This maneuver facilitates further dural elevation along the medial aspect of the anterior clinoid process.
当然，并非所有病例均须行此步骤。	This maneuver may not be necessary in all cases.
图35：进一步切除眶上裂上外侧缘残余的蝶骨小翼，以及构成眶上裂下外侧壁的部分蝶骨大翼。	Figure 35: The remaining portion of the lesser sphenoid wing overlying the supralateral margin of the superior orbital fissure is resected. The portion of the greater sphenoid wing that forms the inferolateral wall of the superior orbital fissure is also partially removed.
这里需使用金刚钻。	A diamond burr can be used for this purpose.
注意持续凉水冲洗以避免骨质过热给周围组织带来的热损伤。	Continuous cooling irrigation must be used to prevent overheating of the bone and thermal injury to the surrounding structures.
这一步骤有利于眶上裂内容物的进一步游离。	Completion of this step provides further mobility for the contents of the superior orbital fissure.
图36：前床突内侧部、位于视神经管上方的骨质需被磨除，以便在进行后续处理前床突之前先游离视神经。	Figure 36: The bone medial to the clinoid process and over the optic foramen and is removed and the optic nerve is untethered before further manipulation of the clinoid process is attempted.
覆盖于视神经表面的骨质很薄，可在前颅窝后内侧部轻易地识别。	The bone over the nerve is thin and often easily identified from the bone of the posterior and medial aspects of the anterior cranial fossa.
该步骤可将视神经从其骨孔内游离，以减少在后续切除前床突过程中对其带来的损伤。	This maneuver will release the nerve from its foramen and minimizes injury to the nerve during manipulation and mobilization of the clinoid process.
须保持冲洗以减少神经的热损伤。	Ample irrigation is used to avoid heat injury to the nerve.
随后用金刚钻蛋壳化前床突，并将其从视柱上离断。	The anterior clinoid process is then generously and centrally cored out using a diamond burr to detach the process from the optic strut.
图37：将蛋壳化的前床突与周围的硬膜返折如床突韧带等充分游离开，用垂体瘤钳将其取出。	Figure 37: The centrally shelled clinoid is circumferentially dissected from the surrounding dural folds, including the clinoid ligaments, and can be removed using pituitary rongeurs.
来自海绵窦的出血可用浸有凝血酶的明胶海绵轻易控制。	Venous bleeding from the cavernous sinus is easily controlled with thrombin-soaked Gelfoam packing.
图38：切除前床突后，可根据需要进一步开放视神经管。	Figure 38: After the anterior clinoid process is removed, the optic canal can be expanded further, if necessary.
眶后部的骨质也可切除。	The bone over the posterior aspect of the orbit can also be resected.
对于眶内后部的肿瘤，可配合使用咬骨钳和金刚钻进一步去除眶上壁和眶后壁骨质。	For tumors situated in the posterior aspect of the orbit, additional bone (the superior and lateral orbital walls) can be removed using a combination of fine rongeurs and a diamond burr.
在肿瘤切除后，需对这些进一步切除的眶壁进行重建，以减少将来眼球内陷的风险。	Further bony removal along the orbital walls will require reconstruction of these walls after tumor resection is completed. This reconstruction will minimize the risk of future endophthalmus.
图39：半圆形切开硬膜，基底指向眶尖。	Figure 39: The dura is incised in a semicircular shape with its base toward the orbital apex.
该切口的目的在于暴露颞上回、侧裂和额下回。	The goal of this incision is to expose the superior temporal gyrus, Sylvian fissure, and inferior frontal gyrus.
注意须将额部切口延伸至骨窗拐角处，以便充分利用额下空间。	It is important to extend the frontal incision to the corner of the craniotomy to facilitate subfrontal access.
图40：用数根缝线牵拉硬膜，以利于暴露。	Figure 40: Several dural retention sutures are placed to improve exposure.
缝合点应靠近硬膜辦基底部，而非其边缘，这样可以最大程度地牵开眶内容物、颞肌等软组织，以充分利用硬膜内额下径路。	These sutures are placed at the base of the dural flap rather than at its edge so that the intradural subfrontal trajectory is least affected by the orbital contents and other soft tissues including the temporalis muscle.
图41：常规缝合硬膜。	Figure 41: The dura is closed in standard fashion.
若已开放额窦，则需尽力水密缝合硬膜。	If the frontal sinus had been entered, every attempt should be made to complete a watertight dural closure.
额窦黏膜应彻底去除，窦腔填以数块颞肌。	The mucosa of the frontal sinus is completely removed and the sinus is filled with pieces of temporalis muscle.
建议常规使用带蒂骨膜瓣覆盖额窦。	The routine use of a vascularized pericranial graft to cover the exenterated frontal sinus is recommended.
相关要点请参见《双额入路》章节。	Please refer to the Bifrontal Craniotomy chapter for further details.
图42：骨瓣还纳，用微型颅骨连接板固定。	Figure 42: The bone flap is replaced and secured using miniplates.
颧骨额突用一块小的连接板固定。	A small miniplate is used to secure the bone flap to the frontal process of the zygoma.
颅骨塑形材料可用于修补骨质缺损。	Cranioplasty material may be used to fill in the bony defects.
图43：将颞肌筋膜重新缝合至颞上线处预留的筋膜带上。	Figure 43: The muscle is secured in place using the tendon and muscle cuffs created at the time of exposure.
将脂肪垫翻转复位。	The fat pad may be reflected back to its original position.
图44：缝合帽状腱膜，可吸收缝线缝合皮肤。	Figure 44: The scalp flap is approximated via closure of the galea and the skin is closed using absorbable sutures.
· 强烈建议选择性地使用眶颧入路。	Selective use of OZ is highly recommended.
笔者将下述情况列为改良眶颧入路的特定适应症：向上方延伸的鞍旁、三脑室、脚间池病变，以及位于眶内后三分之一的病变。	I use the modified OZ for “high-riding” lesions extending superiorly within the parasellar/third ventricular/interpeduncular spaces and the posterior one-third of the orbit.
· 关键孔的准确定位是成功完成单骨瓣法眶颧入路的重要前提。	Accurate placement of the keyhole is important for successfully completing a one-piece OZ.
· 在前颅底脑膜瘤术中，应避免在非直视情况下盲目地对眶顶进行骨折。	Indiscriminate and blind fracture of the orbital roof should be avoided during exposure of anterior skull base meningiomas.
病理性的眶顶骨质增生，可使得骨折线累及视神经管而导致视神经损伤。	Due to resultant hyperostosis of the orbital roof, the fracture may extend to the level of the optic canal and result in optic nerve injury.
经岩骨前部入路	Anterior Petrosectomy
中颅底入路一般用来切除小型听神经瘤和沿着内听道上唇生长的脑膜瘤，该入路的自然扩展进一步扩大了岩尖的骨质切除范围并可暴露上岩斜区和腹外侧脑干，也就是经岩骨前部入路（岩骨前部切除术）。	The middle fossa approach has been traditionally used for resection of small acoustic neuromas and meningiomas along the lip of the internal auditory canal (IAC). The natural extension of this approach has been the anterior petrosal approach (anterior petrosectomy) that involves expanded bony resection at the petrous apex to expose the upper petroclival region and ventrolateral brainstem.
经岩骨入路不断得到改进使得它与乳突后、中颅底和翼点入路等传统手术途径相比，在显露岩斜区方面优势更明显。	Transpetrosal approaches have evolved to offer advantages over traditional operative corridors, such as retromastoid, middle fossa, and pterional trajectories for exposing lesions within the petroclival area.
描述经岩骨入路的术语具有很大的非特异性，有时会造成混淆，因为关于其改良式存在许多不同的命名。	The terminology used to describe transpetrosal approaches is very nonspecific and sometimes confusing because different nomenclature has been used to report their modifications.
但是，如果我们系统地梳理一下各种改良的经岩骨术式，我们会发现大致可分为两类：	However, if we systematically analyze all modified transpetrosal procedures, we find that they can be classified into two types:
1. 岩骨前部切除术：切除岩尖	Anterior petrosectomy: removal of the petrous apex
2. 岩骨后部切除术：切除岩锥	Posterior petrosectomy: removal of the petrous pyramid
文献中报导的更彻底或者扩大化的经岩骨入路经常都是包括常规入路和前／岩骨后部切除的联合术式。	More radical or extensive transpetrosal osteotomies that have been described in the literature are often combined approaches comprised of conventional craniotomies in conjunction with an anterior or posterior petrosectomy.
岩骨内含有很多非常重要的结构，包括面听神经束、颈内动脉和迷路。	The petrous bone contains many critical structures including the cranial nerves VII/VIII complex, internal carotid artery, and labyrinth.
前、岩骨后部切除术都以保留迷路的完整性为目的。	Anterior and posterior petrosectomies aim to preserve the integrity of the labyrinth.
个人相信牺牲迷路的全岩骨切除术已经极少需要了。	A total petrosectomy will sacrifice the labyrinth; I believe this procedure is rarely, if ever, necessary.
本文将会复习标准岩骨前部切除的技术要点以及介绍通过哪些手术操作实现以最小化的骨质磨除代价来处理斜坡上三分之一和中脑腹外侧、桥脑上部的病变。	In this chapter, I attempt to review the technical nuances for a standard anterior petrosal osteotomy and describe the operative maneuvers to minimize the need for additional bone removal when resecting lesions along the upper third of the clivus and ventrolateral midbrain and upper pons.
另有章节讨论中颅底入路切除听神经瘤的原则。	The tenets for the middle fossa approach to vestibular schwannomas are discussed in another chapter.
岩骨前部切除术的适应征	Indications for the Anterior Petrosectomy
岩骨前部切除术最主要的适应征包括：	The most common indications for an anterior petrosectomy include:
1. 岩骨内病变，伴或不伴硬膜外扩展，包括：	Intrapetrous lesions, with or without epidural extension, including:
（1）岩骨前部的囊肿（表皮样囊肿或胆脂瘤）	Anterior petrosal cysts (epidermoid or cholesteatomas)
（2）脊索瘤和软骨肉瘤（更倾向于经鼻内镜入路）	Chordomas and chondrosarcomas (endoscopic transnasal route preferred)
2. 上岩斜区和meckel腔的肿瘤，包括：	Upper petroclival and Meckel’s cave tumors, including:
（1）脑膜瘤	Meningiomas
（2）三叉神经鞘瘤	Trigeminal schwannomas
3. 超越中线的脑池内皮样囊肿和表皮样囊肿	Intracisternal dermoid and epidermoid cysts extending across midline
4. 外侧和腹侧中脑、桥脑的轴内病变（海绵状血管畸形和肿瘤）	Lateral and ventral midbrain and pontine intra-axial lesions (cavernous malformations and tumors)
5. 后循环动脉瘤（“低位”基底动脉尖和基底动脉主干的动脉瘤）	Posterior circulation aneurysms (“low lying” basilar apex and basilar trunk aneurysms)
不适合此入路的病变：	Some targets that are not suitable for this approach are:
1. 纯粹的斜坡肿瘤（起源于岩下窦沟或岩斜裂内侧）	Purely clival tumors (originating medial to the groove of the inferior petrosal sinus or petroclival sulcus)
2. 超越内听道下界或者起源于内听道下方和／或后方的肿瘤	Tumors extending caudal or originating caudal and/or posterior to the IAC
3. 侵犯颅神经通行管孔的肿瘤	Extensions of the tumor into the cranial nerves’ foramina
4. 纯粹的桥脑下部和延髓病变	Purely lower pontine and medullary lesions
总之，在以下情况时，岩骨前部切除术优选于常规入路：	As a general rule, the anterior petrosectomy should be preferred over conventional corridors for:
1. 肿瘤完全位于内听道的内侧和上方	Tumors entirely medial to and above the IAC
2. 肿瘤骑跨中、后颅窝	Tumors that span the middle and posterior fossae
3. 患者为最好行更激进式切除的年轻人群	Younger patients for whom more aggressive resection is desired
图1.通过岩骨前部切除术切除此例位于右侧的上岩斜区／小脑幕脑膜瘤（上图）。	Figure 1: This right-sided upper petroclival/tentorial meningioma was removed via anterior petrosectomy (top photos).
肿瘤侵犯了海绵窦，但这小部分肿瘤没有被切除。	Note the extension of the tumor into the cavernous sinus; this small portion was not removed.
下图为术后当时复查的影像资料。	The immediate postoperative scans are also included (bottom row).
MRI可以显示肿瘤的边界并筛选出适合行岩前入路的病例。	Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging reveals the limits of the tumor and defines the candidacy of the tumor for this approach.
岩骨前部切除提供的工作通道有限，而且术中若要继续扩展很困难，不合适的病例选择将会导致失望性的结局和肿瘤仅能被次全切除。	Because of the limited working space offered via this route and its inflexibility for expansion intraoperatively, inappropriate patient selection leads to disappointing results and subtotal tumor removal.
如果需要行联合入路应在术前做好计划。	The need for combined operative corridors should be planned preoperatively.
高分辨率的颞骨CT能够观察岩尖的气化情况。	A high-resolution CT scan of the temporal bone can provide additional information about the degree of pneumatization of the petrous apex.
对于骨内病变，这项检查尤其有意义。	This imaging modality is especially beneficial for intraosseus lesions.
一定程度地牵拉颞叶是必要的，强烈推荐行腰大池引流，特别是病变位于优势侧时。	Some degree of temporal lobe retraction is required and the use of a lumbar drain is highly advised, especially for lesions on the dominant side.
术中面神经的电生理监测（肌电图）和脑干听觉诱发电位（BAERs）非常有助于定位面神经和提醒术者哪些操作可能有损伤脑干的风险。	Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring of the facial nerve (electromyography) and brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) is very helpful for localizing the facial nerve and warning the surgeon of maneuvers that may place the brainstem at risk.
岩前入路的最终目的是暴露上三分之一脑干的腹侧和腹外侧。	The ultimate goal of the anterior petrosal approach is to expose the ventral and ventrolateral aspects of the upper third of the brainstem.
牢记这点就可以更容易地理解此入路中每一个步骤的重要性。	With this goal in mind, the importance of the steps involved in this skull base approach can be more readily rationalized.
处理延伸至内听道下方的肿瘤时岩前入路并不合适，术者应该考虑采用岩骨后部切除术。	Tumors extending caudal to the IAC are not suitable for this approach, and a posterior petrosectomy should be considered to access them.
图2.中颅底的骨性解剖以及岩尖与周围组织的关系。	Figure 2: The bony anatomy of the middle fossa and petrous apex in relation to the surrounding tissues is demonstrated.
岩骨前部切除术去除的骨质包括中颅底的后内侧三角，也叫做Kawase三角或者方形三角。	Anterior petrosectomy involves removal of the bone housed in the middle fossa’s posteromedial triangle, also known as Kawase’s or quadrilateral triangle.
这部分的岩尖，其前界是容纳三叉神经下颌支的Meckel腔后缘，后界是弓状隆起，内、外侧界分别为岩上窦和岩浅大神经（GSPN）。（图片由Al Rhoton,Jr馈赠）	This portion of the petrous apex is bordered anteriorly by the posterior margin of Meckel’s cave containing the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve, posteriorly by the arcuate eminence, laterally by the greater superficial petrosal nerve (GSPN), and medially by the superior petrosal sinus (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3.逐步切除岩尖并轮廓化周围相关的解剖结构。	Figure 3: Stepwise resection of the petrous apex with skeletonization of the relevant surrounding anatomy is demonstrated.
下图为磨除岩尖和内听道壁之后的中颅底近距离观察照。	A close-up view of the right middle cranial fossa floor with the petrous apex and the bone over the IAC removed (lower image).
颈内动脉位于岩骨切除范围的前外侧界，下内侧界则为斜坡。	Note the internal carotid artery along the anterolateral border of the bony resection. The inferomedial extent of the osteotomy is ultimately bounded by the clivus.
岩浅大、小神经与岩骨段颈内动脉平行。（图片由Al Rhoton,Jr馈赠）	The greater and lesser superficial petrosal nerves are parallel to the petrous carotid artery (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4.岩骨前部切除术完成后的硬膜下所见。	Figure 4: Intradural exposure after an anterior petrosectomy is shown.
请留意基底动脉的位置和桥脑前外侧的显露范围（图片由Al Rhoton,Jr馈赠）。	Note the location of the basilar artery and the extent of access to the anterolateral pons (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
通常完整保留内听道顶壁的骨质。	The bony roof of the ICA is usually left intact and not removed.
病变会使这些至关重要的结构变形移位并改变局部的解剖学关系，肿瘤被减压后可以让出操作空间。	Deformation of these vital structures by the lesion alters the anatomy and the available working space after lesional decompression.
手术早期并不容易发现这些至关重要的结构，一般在晚期才能识别。	These vital structures are often identified during the later stages of the operation and not easily exposed early.
岩骨前部切除术（经岩骨前部入路）	ANTERIOR PETROSECTOMY (ANTERIOR PETROSAL APPROACH)
摆放患者的体位之前进行腰大池引流。	Before positioning the patient, I place a lumbar drain.
腰大池引流脑脊液可以避免硬膜外抬起颞叶时出现脑组织损伤，这是一项必要的操作。	Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage through the lumbar drain is imperative in avoiding temporal lobe injury during the lobe’s extradural retraction.
一般分次逐渐引流40-60cc的脑脊液（每次10cc）。直至脑组织已经松弛至能够暴露出足够范围的中颅底。	Often 40 to 60cc of CSF is drained gradually (in 10cc aliquots) until the lobe is completely mobilized for adequate exposure of the middle fossa floor.
同时也在患者的下象限腹部消毒铺单备取脂肪组织用于术毕时填补硬膜缺损。	I also prepare the lower quadrant of the patient's abdomen for harvesting fat grafts used for dural closure.
患者体位	Patient Positioning
患者取仰卧位，对侧垫肩，旋转头部使矢状缝与地面平行或最小化成角。	The patient is positioned supine on the operating table. A shoulder roll is placed under the patient's contralateral shoulder and the head rotated until the sagittal suture is parallel to or minimally angled from the floor.
颈部柔软的患者，头部旋转可达70度。	If the patient has a supple neck, he or she can tolerate up to 70 degrees of rotation.
颈部僵硬的患者则需将肩部垫得更高以代偿旋转受限。	If the patient has a more rigid neck, the size of the shoulder roll can be increased to compensate for the lack of rotation.
对于颈部活动度很差的肥胖患者，必须选择侧卧位，以免静脉回流不充分。	For obese patients with less mobile necks, the lateral position must be used to avoid interruption of adequate venous return.
经岩骨入路的手术时间通常都比较久，生理性的中立体位（包括颈部的姿势）可以减少患者的术后不适，因此不妨多采用侧卧位。	I have a low threshold for using the lateral position because petrosectomy operations are often prolonged; physiologically neutral body positions (including neck posture) are associated with less discomfort after surgery.
图5.摆放体位时，患者的颧弓置于术野的最高点。	Figure 5: Patient’s head position with the zygoma as the highest point on the operative field.
头架的单钉打在前额以免干扰手术切口。	The single pin of the skull clamp often has to be placed on the patient’s forehead to avoid the interference of the pins with the incision.
使患者的头顶稍微垂向地面，有助于发挥出重力作用牵拉颞叶的最大效果。	The vertex of the patient's head is tilted slightly toward the floor. This maneuver maximizes the effect of gravity retraction on the temporal lobe.
头架的头钉被固定在术区以外的位置。	The surgeon positions the skull clamp so the pins stay out of the operative working zone.
个人偏好将单钉打在前方的额部，而双钉置于稍偏下的枕骨上。	My preference is to place the single pin anteriorly over the frontal area and the other two pins low on the occipital bone.
单钉与双钉（转轴摇臂）中点的连线必须通过患者头部的赤道线，否则术中可能发生头架滑脱。	A line connecting the single pin with the midpoint between the opposite two pins (swivel rocker arm) must always cross the equator of the patient's head to prevent skull clamp fixation failure during surgery.
头皮切口	Skin Incision
针对岩前入路，有许多种头皮切口类型。	Numerous styles of skin incisions have been described for this approach.
图6.图示的直线切口能够满足手术需求，而且容易愈合。	Figure 6: The linear incision, as illustrated here, is adequate and heals most effectively.
切口起自颞浅动脉前端的颧弓下缘，颞浅动脉可通过触摸血管搏动定位。	This incision starts near the inferior edge of the zygomatic arch, just in front of the superficial temporal artery that can be palpated during planning the incision.
随后切口往上延伸至头顶，恰好越过颞上线。	It extends cranially toward the vertex just above the superior temporal line.
通过直线切口可以分离足够多的皮瓣和颞肌瓣实现充分的颅骨显露，从而避免了更大切口的需要。	The linear incision mobilizes enough scalp and temporal muscle flaps to provide adequate skull exposure and obviates the need for more extensive incisions.
切口完成后，分离皮瓣、颞上线处游离颞肌并往两边扩展，这样能够明显增加颅骨的暴露范围。	Upon completion of the incision, the scalp is undermined and the attachments of the temporalis muscle to the superior temporal line are disconnected beyond the incision. This maneuver significantly expands the bony exposure through the linear incision.
马蹄形切口（蓝线所示）是切除大型肿瘤时的替代选择。	The horseshoe incision (blue outline) is an alternative option for larger tumors.
切口恰好始于耳朵后界，最终下行至耳屏前1-2cm的颧弓水平。	It starts immediately posterior to the ear and finally descends to the level of the zygomatic arch, about 1 to 2 centimeters in front of the tragus.
绿线所示的弧形切口能够有效地使颞肌远离手术通道，也是另外一种替代方案。	The curvilinear incision (green outline) is another alternative that mobilizes the muscle effectively away from the operative working zone.
对于非直线形切口，皮肌瓣作为整体分离。	For a nonlinear incision, a myocutaneous flap is mobilized in a single layer.
骨面上保留一条袖带状的肌筋膜有助于术毕缝合。	A myofascial cuff may be left on the bone to facilitate closure.
对于马蹄形切口，使用鱼钩往下牵开皮肌瓣，直至能够清晰显露颧弓后跟。	For the horseshoe incision, the flap is reflected inferiorly with fishhooks; enough muscle dissection should be completed until the posterior root of the zygomatic arch is clearly visible.
切忌往下过度分离造成颞下颌关节或者外耳道的损伤。	The operator must take care not to dissect so low as to violate the mandibular joint or external auditory canal.
图7.采用马蹄形切口处理一例大型肿瘤时的开颅示意图。	Figure 7: Craniotomy through a horseshoe incision for a large tumor is illustrated.
在颧弓根后方、尽可能低位的颞骨鳞部钻一个单独孔。	A single burr hole is placed as low as possible on the temporal squama, posterior to the root of the zygoma.
仔细地从头盖骨内表面剥离硬膜。	The dura is generously stripped away from the inner surface of the calvarium.
腰大池引流脑脊液促进硬膜下沉。	Lumbar CSF drainage can assist with dural mobilization.
随后，铣刀切开颅骨，骨瓣下缘平行中颅底平面，并尽可能靠近。	Next, the footplate of the craniotome elevates the bone flap with its inferior edge parallel and as close as possible to the floor of the middle fossa.
颧弓与中颅底齐平，可作为参考标志。从前往后，中颅底有轻微升高的趋势。	The zygomatic arch defines the level of the middle fossa floor and may be used as a reference; this floor slopes slightly upward from anterior to posterior direction.
必要情况下增加颅骨钻孔数量有助于卸下骨瓣时保持硬膜的完整性。	More burr holes may be used, if necessary, to preserve the integrity of the dura.
也可以仅仅依靠金刚钻完成骨瓣成形。	Alternatively, the entire bony cut may be done using a diamond drill.
保持硬膜的完整性是非常重要的，因为这样可避免后续在中颅底进行硬膜外操作时损伤颞叶。	Preservation of the dura’s integrity is crucial to avoid injury to the lobe during the later stages of extradural dissection along the middle fossa floor.
图8.演示通过直线形切口开颅。	Figure 8: Craniotomy through a linear incision is illustrated.
此例中，纵行切开颞肌并分离颞上线处的肌肉附着。	In this case, the fibers of the temporalis muscle are split longitudinally and the muscle attachments along the superior temporal line disconnected.
和马蹄形切口相比，直线切口提供的后方暴露稍显不足。	When compared with the horseshoe incision, the posterior extent of exposure may be slightly compromised.
但是，不管采用何种切口，必须暴露颧弓根（箭头）以及卸下1/3在外耳道后、2/3在前的骨瓣。	Regardless which incision is used, the width of the craniotomy is two-thirds anterior and one-third posterior to the IAC. The root of the zygoma is exposed (arrow).
图9.卸去骨瓣后，使用咬骨钳或者侧刃切割钻切除余下的颞骨鳞部底，直至与中颅底齐平。	Figure 9: After the craniotomy flap is elevated, the remaining base of the temporal squama is reduced flush with the floor of the middle fossa. This goal can be accomplished using rongeurs or a drill with a side-cutting burr.
通常此时会有气房开放，必须用骨蜡彻底封闭，杜绝脑脊液漏。	Air cells are often exposed at this step of the operation and must be thoroughly obliterated with bone wax to prevent creation of a CSF fistula.
极其罕见情况下，需要同时磨除颧弓的上缘来解决往中颅底的视角受限。	The superior edge of the zygomatic arch may also be drilled to provide an unobstructed view of the floor of the middle fossa, but this is rarely necessary.
图10.腰大池引流额外的脑脊液使脑组织松弛以备抬起。	Figure 10: Additional removal of CSF through the lumbar drain relaxes the brain in preparation for its mobilization.
一旦中颅底已识别，个人习惯使用1号Penfield剥离子从岩骨的外侧部分剥离硬膜。	Once the floor of the middle fossa is visible, I use a #1 Penfield dissector to detach the dura from the lateral aspect of the petrous bone.
磨除骨质时，引入自动牵开器可以保护硬膜。	A self-retaining retractor may be placed on the dura to protect it during drilling.
彻底去除余下的颞骨鳞部和中颅底外侧的突起骨质使视线可以平中颅底的最低点，由此减少颞叶牵拉。	The remaining bone of the squama and bony gyrations along the lateral middle fossa floor are drilled completely flush with the lowest level of the middle fossa floor to improve the operative working angles while minimizing temporal lobe retraction.
图11.现在抬起中颅底前部的硬膜。	Figure 11: The dura over the floor of the anterior aspect of the middle fossa is now generously elevated.
辨认穿过棘孔的脑膜中动脉（红色箭头），该动脉的硬膜端可能需要被烧灼离断，然后骨蜡和氧化纤维素填塞棘孔。	The middle meningeal artery (red arrow), entering through the foramen spinosum, is identified along the anterior aspect of the bone exposure. The artery must be coagulated on its dural side and transected. Next, I pack the foramen with bone wax and oxidized cellulose.
这时必须停止继续往前剥离硬膜，否则会直接损伤岩浅大神经（GSPN，黄色箭头）和岩浅小神经（LSPN），并可能导致术后出现干眼。	Stripping of the dura anteriorly must stop at this point to avoid direct injury to the greater (GSPN)(yellow arrow) and lesser superficial petrosal nerves (LSPN), leading potentially to dry eyes.
不经意地牵扯GSPN也会损伤面神经，可以通过从后往前抬起硬膜使面神经损伤的风险最小化。	Inadvertent traction on the GSPN will also place the facial nerve at risk. The surgeon can minimize the risk of this type of injury by lifting the dura in a posterior-to-anterior direction.
辨认GSPN在后方面神经管裂孔的起源；沿神经走形方向向前剥离硬膜，神经不会从骨槽里移位。	The origin of the GSPN can be identified posteriorly at the hiatus; the dura is then stripped anteriorly in line with the nerve to prevent dislocation of the nerve out of its groove.
硬膜外显露的第二项注意点就是必须寻找岩骨嵴的“真正边缘”。	The second caveat to the epidural exposure is to find the “true edge” of the petrous ridge.
岩上窦在岩骨嵴上表面形成岩骨沟，这条沟的上缘经常被误认为岩骨嵴导致硬膜上抬不够充分。	The superior petrosal sinus forms the petrosal groove along the superior aspect of the petrous ridge. The upper edge of this groove is often mistaken for the petrous ridge, resulting in inadequate elevation of the dura.
适当剥离岩骨嵴的硬膜可以使脑压板尖端容易伸入岩骨嵴并最大化地抬起硬膜，而且不会发生滑脱。	Proper elevation of the dura along the ridge allows the retractor’s blade to readily rest against the petrous ridge and optimally retract the dura without slippage.
分别在正对着弓状隆起和紧贴三叉神经压迹外侧的部位各放置一个脑压板。	I place two retractor blades: one along the arcuate eminence, and the second just lateral to the trigeminal impression.
图12.暴露Kawase三角（虚线区域所示）。	Figure 12: Exposure of Kawase’s triangle (indicated by hash marks) is demonstrated.
当岩骨嵴水平的硬膜也被抬起后就可以清晰识别Kawase四边形的标志性结构：（1）外界为GSPN（和通常也包括LSPN）；（2）后界为弓状隆起；（3）前界为半月神经节的后缘；（4）内侧界为岩骨嵴。	With the dura completely elevated to the level of the petrous ridge, the landmarks of Kawase’s quadrilateral are clearly visible: 1) laterally, the GSPN (and often the LSPN); 2) posteriorly, the arcuate eminence; 3) anteriorly, the posterior edge of the gasserian ganglion; and 4) medially, the petrous ridge.
下一步是辨认道平面，道平面是指覆盖于内听道上方的中颅底区域。	The next step is to identify the meatal plane—the area of bone covering the IAC.
有三种方式用来定位道平面。	Three ways of locating the meatal plane have been described.
Garcia-Ibanez技术依赖于岩浅大神经与弓状隆起形成的一般为120度的夹角，这个夹角的平分线就是内听道的大致走形方向以及磨岩骨嵴的起始点。	The Garcia-Ibanez technique relies on the relationship between the GSPN and arcuate eminence, usually located at an angle of 120 degrees. Bisection of this angle provides the general location of the IAC and a starting point for drilling the petrous ridge.
类似地，Fisch认为弓状隆起长轴与道平面的60度角假想线就是内听道的大体位置。	Similarly, the Fisch technique uses an approximately 60-degree angle between the long axis of the arcuate eminence and the meatal plane to estimate the location of the IAC.
必须注意，中颅底的解剖具有相当大的变异，弓状隆起并非总是与上半规管的位置相符。	It is important to note that the anatomy of the middle fossa floor is widely variable, and the arcuate eminence is not always a reliable locator of the superior semicircular canal.
笔者偏好在弓状隆起长轴做一条45度角的假想线与岩骨嵴垂直，一般这条线就对应着内听道。	As a general rule, the IAC courses at a 45-degree angle from a line that runs from the arcuate eminence perpendicular to the petrous ridge; this is my preferred method to locate the IAC.
绝大部分的岩斜脑膜瘤手术都不需要完全轮廓化内听道的硬膜，显露最内侧的作为参考标志便可。	In most cases of petroclival meningiomas, there is no need to fully expose the overlying dura of the IAC, and only the most medial aspect of the canal may be exposed as a reference.
分离覆盖于V3和半月神经节外侧缘的硬膜固有层对于最大程度地抬起颞底硬膜很有好处。	It is advantageous to dissect the dura propria from the sheath of V3 and the lateral border of the gasserian ganglion to optimize elevation of the temporal dura.
图13.充分灌洗以防对临近结构产生热损伤的条件下，使用粗砂钻头仔细磨除位于道平面前方的Kawase四边形区域。	Figure 13: The bone within the boundaries of the Kawase’s quadrilateral region, anterior to the meatal plane, is carefully drilled using a rough diamond burr along with abundant irrigation to prevent thermal damage to the underlying structures.
绝大多数病例的骨质切除范围限定于颈内动脉后方和内听道前方，除非处理某些特殊的目标病变时需要暴露这些结构。	In most cases, the bone resection is kept posterior to the internal carotid artery (ICA) and anterior to the IAC unless there is a specific reason to expose these structures due to the particular features of the pathology at hand.
颈内动脉上表面可能没有或者仅有薄弱的骨板覆盖，这非常有利于早期识别颈内动脉，但是术者必须牢记在心以防误伤。	The bone over the roof of the ICA may be missing or significantly attenuated, leading to early exposure of the artery; this fact should be kept in mind to avoid injury to the ICA.
为了避免损伤耳蜗，切忌往外侧磨除至颈内动脉－内听道的夹角区域。	Also, to prevent damage to the cochlea, I abstain from drilling lateral to the ICA-IAC angle.
骨质切除的基本技术是先掏空岩尖的中心部分，随后使用刮匙刮去硬膜表面的薄层骨片。	The basic technique is to core out the central portion of the bony apex and later, using curettes, remove the thin shell of bone from the dura.
通常都应该邀请耳科同事参与岩尖的切除过程。	I usually ask my otology colleagues to be involved during the resection of the petrous apex.
图14.磨除V3后方、颈内动脉和耳蜗内侧、上半规管和内听道前方的所有骨质直至暴露后颅窝的硬膜，完成岩骨前部切除。	Figure 14: All of the bone between the V3 anteriorly, the ICA and the cochlea laterally, and the superior semicircular canal and the IAC posteriorly is drilled away until the dura of the posterior fossa is reached, thereby completing the anterior transpetrosal osteotomy.
可以使用单极状的刺激器透过硬膜定位面神经。	A monopolar stimulating probe may be used for transdural mapping of the facial nerve.
耳蜗的骨质非常致密，明显有别于岩尖的松质骨。	The bone along the margins of the cochlea is very compact and distinguishable from the cancellous bone of the petrous apex.
进一步磨除三叉神经下方的骨质直至到达斜坡的侧边（＊）。	Moreover, resection of bone can proceed beneath the trigeminal nerve as far as the lateral aspect of the clivus (*);
但是术者要保持警惕，一定不能损伤三叉神经。	however, the operator must take great care to prevent injury to cranial nerve V.
当然，充分的灌洗是必须的，否则磨钻在岩尖内侧区域工作时有可能对Dorello管内的展神经造成热损伤。	Also, copious irrigation is necessary to prevent thermal injury to cranial nerve VI in the Dorello’s canal while drilling the medial extent of exposure.
甚至可以暴露远至岩下窦水平的后颅窝硬膜以扩展手术通道的下界。	The operative corridor can be even further extended caudally by following the posterior fossa dura as far as the inferior petrosal sinus.
红色箭头指向颈内动脉。	The route of the carotid artery is marked with the red arrow.
吸引器尖端为后颅窝的硬膜。	The posterior fossa dura is at the tip of the suction device.
硬膜的剪开方式应该要能够最大化地显露硬膜下的结构。	Dural incisions should maximize the intradural extent of exposure.
图15.T形剪开硬膜。	Figure 15: The dural opening is planned as a T-shaped incision.
平行骨窗下缘在颞底硬膜做第一道切口。	The first incision is made along the basal temporal dura parallel to the inferior edge of the craniotomy.
第二道切口垂直于第一道，并且透过岩上窦延伸至后颅窝硬膜。	The second cut is perpendicular to the first, crossing the superior petrosal sinus into the posterior fossa dura.
这部分硬膜经常会被肿瘤／脑膜瘤浸润，因此需要被切除。	This dura is often infiltrated by the tumor/meningioma and may be resected.
笔者习惯先在岩上窦两端各做一道切口，随后Weck夹结扎岩上窦，再将两边的切口连通。	I often make two separate dural incisions separated by the superior petrosal sinus. The sinus is then ligated using a Weck clip and the dural incisions connected.
应该仔细辨认三叉神经的位置，否则切开硬膜时很容易就会在不经意之间将其切断（后文有更详细的叙述）。	Note the location of the trigeminal nerve within the dura; this nerve can be easily and inadvertently transected if not properly located (please see more details below).
图16.谨慎地剪开硬膜切口的后肢，确保没有损伤到Labbe静脉。	Figure 16: The posterior limb of the incision must be carefully completed to ensure that the vein of Labbé is not injured.
往更深部剪开硬膜之前，将脑压板放置在硬膜下保护脑组织。	I advance the retractors intradurally to protect the brain during the deeper dural incisions.
切断岩上窦时，追寻Labbe静脉直至其静脉窦汇入点，确认输出端没有被结扎。	The vein of Labbé may be followed to its insertion point to ensure that its outflow is not obliterated during the division of the superior petrosal sinus.
随后往后方朝着三叉神经穿入硬膜的部位切开小脑幕。	The tentorium is then transected posteriorly to the point where cranial nerve V enters the dura.
病理状况下，三叉神经在Meckel腔入口处可能会被移位，剪开硬膜时很容易在不经意间将其切断，因此术者应该保持足够的警惕。	The operator should also be especially careful during these dural incisions to protect the trigeminal nerve—it can easily be inadvertently transected due to its displacement by the tumor as it enters the Meckel cave at the porus trigeminus.
图17.术毕时，透过中颅底可以以宽阔的前外侧视角来观察后颅窝的结构。	Figure 17: The end result of the procedure is a generous ventrolateral view of the structures of the posterior fossa through a middle fossa corridor.
桥脑腹侧的海绵状血管畸形很容易由此入路切除。	A ventral pontine cavernous malformation can be readily resected through this route.
轴外病变影响着局部神经血管的移位方式（上图所示）。	The underlying extra-axial pathology affects the pattern of displacement of the regional neurovascular structures (upper sketch).
岩前入路中，三叉神经位于手术通道的中心并且在剪开硬膜和切除肿瘤时容易受损（中图）。	Cranial V is the center of the operative corridor in this approach and can be easily injured during dural opening and tumor resection (middle image).
下图为最终所见，侵犯海绵窦的一小块肿瘤（箭头）未能被切除。	The final outcome of resection is noted in the lower image; a small amount of tumor infiltrating the cavernous sinus is left behind (arrow).
术毕时原位缝合硬膜明显是不可能的，应该采取其他措施。	Primary dural closure is obviously impossible in this area and alternative methods are needed.
球状的脂肪组织是抵抗脑脊液漏的最佳屏障之一，可将多条条带状的脂肪组织横跨在硬膜切口两边以达到填补目的。	Adipose tissue with its globular texture is one of the best barriers against CSF leakage. Strips of adipose tissue are placed across the dural opening to seal the dural defect.
在此之前，必须用骨蜡彻底封闭岩尖和乳突的气房。	Before placement of the adipose grafts, all air cells including the ones at the petrous apex and mastoid area must be meticulously waxed.
或者将带蒂的后部颞肌瓣翻转填充硬膜缺损，这种方法适用于接受过放射治疗的再次手术患者。	Alternatively, a vascularized muscle flap prepared from the posterior aspect of the temporalis muscle may be rotated to fill the defect in the dura. This latter method is used during repeat operations for patients who have undergone radiation treatment.
最后复位骨瓣，微型钛板固定，标准方式缝合颞肌和皮瓣。	The bone flap is replaced and secured using miniplates, and the rest of closure is conducted in the standard fashion.
术后48小时内，从腰大池每小时引流8cc的脑脊液。	A lumbar drain is used to drain 8cc per hour of CSF for 48 hours after surgery.
术后第一天上午复查头颅CT排除明显的气颅，随后方可行腰大池引流。	A head CT scan the morning after surgery should exclude significant pneumocephalus before the drain is utilized.
鼓励患者尽早下床活动。	Patients are mobilized as soon as possible.
如果术后出现脑脊液鼻漏，重新进行腰大池置管继续引流3-4天。	If postoperative rhinorrhea is encountered, a lumbar drain is reinstituted and continued for 3-4 days.
如果停止腰大池引流后仍有明显的脑脊液漏，应该实施二次手术，重新用骨蜡封闭岩尖气房和脂肪组织填塞术腔，术毕继续保持腰大池引流2-3天。	If leakage is evident after discontinuation of the lumbar drain, repeat operative intervention with rewaxing of the apical air cells and repacking of the resection cavity with fat strips is required. The lumbar drain is then continued for another 2 to 3 days.
· 合适的病例选择是手术获得成功的关键。	Patient selection is one of the key elements for operative success.
岩骨前部切除术用来显露上部脑干的腹侧和腹外侧以及斜坡的上三分之一，但是无法到达内听道下方的区域。	Anterior petrosectomy is designed to access the ventral and ventrolateral regions of the upper brainstem or the upper third of the clivus. This corridor is not designed to reach below the IAC. This approach offers a narrow, inflexible working zone and does not allow the operator to reach large tumors.
大型肿瘤不适合通道狭窄、不灵活的岩前入路，可能还需要联合其他入路进行分期手术。	Large tumors may require a staged approach through adjuvant routes.
· 腰大池引流对于避免牵拉伤绝非可有可无。	A lumbar drain is indispensable to avoid retraction injury.
硬膜必须保持完整直至准备切开时。	The dura must remain intact until the operator intentionally opens the dura.
· 如果腰大池引流不能充分地松弛颞叶，术者应该放弃岩骨前部切除术并设计其他入路择期再次手术。	If lumbar CSF drainage does not allow adequate temporal lobe decompression, the procedure should be abandoned and an alternative approach contemplated at a different operative session.
强行牵拉颞叶的危害性非常大，会导致令人失望的结局。	Forceful lobar retraction is hazardous and leads to disappointing results.
· 磨除岩骨时术者的耐心很重要。	Patience is important during petrous bone drilling.
必须进行刻苦的实验室训练方能完成安全、高效的岩骨切除。	Practice in the laboratory is an indispensable prerequisite for safety and efficacy of petrosectomy.
耳鼻喉科同事在实施岩前入路时扮演着极其重要的角色。	Our ENT colleagues are essential members of our team during this procedure.
· 谨慎地切开硬膜。	Incisions within the dura must be carefully placed.
肿瘤会挤压移位周围的神经血管，切开硬膜过程中意外损伤这些至关重要的结构是比较常见的。	Tumors displace cranial nerves and vessels, and injury to these vital structures during the dural opening is often most unexpected.
术者可以说“就在那里”，即使错了上千次；但绝不能说“以前是在那里”，即使只对了一次。	It is OK to say “there it is” and be wrong a thousand times, but it is not OK to say “there it was” and be right even once.
眶上开颅术	Supraorbital Craniotomy
眶上开颅是一种外侧颅底入路，适于到达鞍旁、视交叉旁和侧裂内间隙。	The supraorbital craniotomy is a lateral skull base approach suitable to access the parasellar, parachiasmatic and intrasylvian space.
本入路意在减少脑组织牵拉，术者若要达到深部、特别是优势半球深处的病变，这是一个重要的考虑事项。	This approach attempts to minimize brain retraction, an important consideration for surgeons attempting to reach deep lesions, especially underneath the dominant hemisphere.
若结合去除眶顶，凭此入路眶内肿瘤触手可及。	When combined with removal of the orbital roof, intraorbital tumors become readily accessible via this approach.
眶上开颅与眉弓切口连用时是一种微侵袭锁孔入路，这一锁孔入路的概念特别受欢迎。	When combined with an eyebrow incision, the supraorbital craniotomy is a minimally invasive keyhole approach. This concept of a keyhole approach has gained special popularity.
一些作者对于传统经额和额颞入路提出了多方面的改良，也引起了不少混淆。	Several authors have described various modifications of the conventional frontal and frontotemporal approaches, creating some confusion.
各种不同的额下径路就有所谓的：眶上、眉弓眶上、额外侧、眉上额外侧锁孔、外侧眶上或诸如此类的组合。	Variations of the subfrontal route can be referred to as supraorbital, eyebrow supraorbital, frontolateral, supraciliary frontolateral keyhole, lateral supraorbital, and several other combinations.
较之标准翼点入路对外侧部额下的显露，眶上额下通道更靠前的工作路径虽然使手术操作距离延长，却减少了对脑组织的处理与牵拉。	When compared with the standard pterional lateral subfrontal exposure, the more anterior trajectory of the supraorbital subfrontal corridor affords a longer operative working distance, but potentially requires less brain manipulation and retraction.
通过有意识地使用吸引器和剥离子进行动态牵拉，眶上额下径路在处理包括前循环动脉瘤和大型前颅底肿瘤在内的复杂病变时，被赋予了灵活可变的操作角度。	The use of dynamic retraction through the strategic use of suction apparatus and dissectors bestows the supraorbital subfrontal route flexible working angles for managing complex lesions, including anterior circulation aneurysms and large anterior skull base tumors.
图1：解剖标本显示处理前颅窝和鞍旁间隙最常用的几种微侵袭前外侧入路。	Figure 1: This anatomical dissection demonstrates the most frequently used minimally invasive anterolateral approaches to the anterior cranial fossa and parasellar spaces.
这些入路的暴露范围有很多重叠。	Substantial overlap among these exposure is apparent.
额外侧入路与眶上入路的区别在于前者略朝向蝶骨大翼。	The frontolateral approach is distinguished from the supraorbital route by its subtle rotation towards the sphenoid wing.
绿色：眶上入路；橙色：外侧眶上入路；红色：迷你型翼点入路；蓝色：翼点入路（图片由AL. Rhoton Jr.教授授权使用并修改）。	Green: supraorbital approach; Orange: lateral supraorbital approach; Red: minipterional approach; Blue: pterional approach (Modified with permission, courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
我们在行额下手术时，对额叶底面的功能往往不加重视。	We often underestimate the function of the basal frontal lobes during subfrontal operations.
额叶眶部和底面内侧区的皮层常被误认为是“哑区”或“非功能区”。	The orbitofrontal and mediobasal cortices are often misleadingly considered ‘silent’ and ‘noneloquent.
但对于患者的家人和同事，其功能却是实实在在的，当患者的智性水平较高时尤为如此。	’ However, their functions are apparent to the patients’ families and coworkers, especially when the patient is high functioning.
额下部损伤总是引起去抑制状态，这是由于破坏了与认知处理过程及决策相关的额叶眶部而引起的（参见维基百科）。	Subfrontal injury frequently leads to disinhibition caused by damaging the orbitofrontal region, which is involved in cognitive processing and decision-making (see Wikipedia).
损伤额叶底面内侧区将导致顺行性或逆行性遗忘。	Mediobasal injury leads to anterograde and retrograde amnesia.
神经外科医生很难注意到这些改变，但神经心理学检查是很容易发现的。	These deficits are not apparent to the treating neurosurgeon, but readily detectable on a neuropsychological examination.
在处理病变时要设计适合的手术入路，调整患者体位利用重力使脑组织下垂，扩大去除骨质，松弛脑组织，广泛分离蛛网膜，以及最重要的是，有意识地动态牵拉和处理正常脑组织，以此来避免额叶的外源性损伤。	Extraneous frontal lobe injuries can be avoided with proper planning of the operative approach and patient positioning to use gravity retraction, enhanced bony removal, brain relaxation, wide arachnoid dissection and most importantly, strategic use of dynamic retraction and handling of the normal brain during manipulation of the pathology.
眶上开颅适用于大型（＜5cm）前颅底肿瘤，如嗅沟脑膜瘤、蝶骨平台脑膜瘤和鞍结节脑膜瘤，可也用于脑血管病，如指向前方或指向下方的前交通动脉瘤（A-Comm）和普通的眼动脉瘤。	A supraorbital craniotomy is used for large (5cm) anterior skull base tumors such as olfactory groove, planum sphenoidale, and tuberculum sella meningiomas, as well as vascular lesions such as anteriorly and inferiorly pointing anterior communicating artery (A-Comm) and common ophthalmic aneurysms.
鞍旁肿瘤如颅咽管瘤也是此入路理想的对象。	Parasellar tumors such as craniopharyngiomas are also ideal candidates for this approach.
不过，此入路在垂直方向的显露受限，并不适合位置更靠后且明显向头侧扩展的病变。	However, more posteriorly situated lesions with significant cranial extensions are not suitable for this approach due to the limited vertical reach of this corridor.
位于前部外侧裂的中间至内侧（如小型大脑中动脉瘤）和大脚脚区（小型肿瘤）的小型病变，若筛选得当，此入路也是合适的。	Appropriately selected small lesions within the mid to medial anterior Sylvian fissure (such as small middle cerebral artery aneurysms) and the interpeduncular space (small tumors) are also reasonable contenders for this approach.
但因目标距离较远，在处理大型肿瘤或复杂动脉瘤时，所需的操作角度是受限的。	The long working distance to these targets restricts the working angles needed to manipulate large tumors or complex aneurysms.
对于担心影响美观的患者，选用眉弓切口具有一定的风险。	This is a slightly increased risk of cosmetic concerns associated with the eye-brow incision.
眉毛稀疏的患者应考虑传统翼点入路。	Patients with sparse eye-brows should consider traditional pterional routes.
此外，沿蝶骨嵴扩展至中颅窝的肿瘤最好选用传统手术入路。	Moreover, tumors along the sphenoid wing and extending into the middle fossa are best approached through the traditional corridors.
术前肿瘤栓塞或有助于减少失血；不过，笔者很少把这种方法用于脑膜瘤，因为在开颅时沿前颅底就能把肿瘤血供断掉。	Preoperative tumor embolization may help minimize blood loss; however, I have hardly ever use this method for meningiomas because the craniotomy allows tumor devascularization along the anterior skull base.
术前阅片明确额窦向外侧扩展的程度以及能否避免打开额窦。	Preoperative scans should be reviewed to assess the lateral extent of the frontal sinus and the potential to avoid its entry.
若额窦已开放，必须去除其内的黏膜，窦腔填塞肌肉和骨蜡。	If this sinus is entered, the mucosa must be removed and the cavity packed with muscle and bone wax.
用开颅时留取的骨膜瓣覆盖开放的额窦。	A pericranial flap harvested during the exposure can be preserved and used to cover the frontal sinus opening.
手术早期难以打开基底池，除非过度牵拉张力较高的额叶。	The basal cisterns may be difficult to reach early in the surgery without significant retraction of a tense frontal lobe.
故而对有病变相关脑水肿或预计颅内张力增高的患者，术前可行腰大池引流。	Therefore, a lumbar drain may be used for patients who have associated lesional edema and expected increased intracranial tension.
图2：前颅底上面观。	Figure 2: Superior view of the anterior skull base.
图中所示沿眶上额下的手术操作路径，易于达到前交通动脉复合体和鞍旁区域，但手术操作距离较长。	Notice the accessibility of the A-Comm complex and parasellar region, but also the long operative working distance through the supraorbital subfrontal trajectory.
眶上开颅时可能开放额窦（图片由AL. Rhoton Jr. 教授授权）。	The frontal sinus may be encountered during a supraorbital osteotomy (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3：切开眉弓并翻起关键孔处脂肪垫，此处有损伤面神经额支的风险。	Figure 3: The frontalis branches of the facial nerve are at risk during an eyebrow incision and mobilization of the fat pad at the area of the keyhole.
行眉弓切口时将这些分支保留在肌肉中随肌肉牵向后方。	These branches are reflected posteriorly and preserved along with the muscle during an eyebrow incision.
这些分支走行于脂肪垫浅层的筋膜中，因此不应横行切开脂肪垫。	These nerves are within the superior fascia of the fat pad; therefore, the pad should not be transected horizontally.
眶上开颅	SUPRAORBITAL CRANIOTOMY
患者在手术床上取仰卧位。	The patient is placed on the operating table in a supine position.
头向对侧转动的程度依病变特点而定。	The degree of head turn is determined by the characteristics of the lesion.
由于此入路主要用于中线处病变，笔者往往只将患者头部转动20°。	Since this approach is mainly used for midline lesions, I frequently turn the patient’s head only 20 degrees.
头钉沿双侧颞上线相对放置，单钉置于耳廓正上方。	The pins are placed directly across from each other along the superior temporal line, with the single pin directly above the pinna.
旋转双钉臂，避免影响冠状切口。	The double-pin arm may be rotated to prevent its interference with the bicoronal incision.
患者妥善固定在手术床上，使轴向左右旋转手术床时确保患者安全。	The patient should be well secured to the table in case the need arises to ‘airplane’ the table in one direction or another.
眶上开颅有冠状切口和眉弓切口两种样式供选择。	There are two alternative incision styles for a supraorbital craniotomy: bicoronal and eyebrow incision.
图4：笔者更喜欢直接在眉弓上标记眉弓切口（上图）。	Figure 4: I prefer an eyebrow incision marked just above the eyebrow (top images).
眶上切迹和神经的位置一并标出。	The locations of the supraorbital notch and nerve are also marked.
一些医师（如Soutar）担心眉弓切口可能影响美观，更喜欢使用延至对侧瞳孔中线的冠状切口（下图）。	Some surgeons prefer the use of a bicoronal (Soutar) incision (bottom images) extending to the level of the contralateral pupil because of potential cosmetic concerns related to the eyebrow incision.
笔者认为对于眉毛正常或较重的患者，眉弓切口从美观方面是可接受的。	I have found the eyebrow incision cosmetically acceptable among patients with normal or thick eyebrows.
对于发迹较低者，Soutar切口长度可适当缩短。	By following a low hairline, the Soutar incision may be shortened.
保持骨膜完整并单独分离后备用。	The pericranium may be preserved and harvested in a separate layer.
颞肌应从开始就完整保留。	The temporalis muscle should initially be left intact.
两种入路的切口线均已标出（左下图）。	The outline of the craniotomy for both incisions is marked (bottom left).
患者头部朝对侧转动并向后倾斜20°，使额叶借助重力的作用下垂。	The patient’s head is turned and tilted back ~20 degrees. This maneuver allows the frontal lobes to fall back with gravity.
图5：面神经额支位置如图所示，沿脂肪垫的浅层筋膜走行。	Figure 5: The location of the frontalis nerve is demonstrated.  The nerve is located along the superficial fascia of the fat pad.
图6：完成眉弓切口，从皮下间隙内解剖游离出眶上神经（大黑箭）；该神经构成了切口的内侧缘，须保护。	Figure 6: As the eyebrow incision is completed, the supraorbital nerve (large black arrow) is dissected within and released from the subcutaneous space; this nerve defines the medial edge of the incision and must be protected.
Soutar切口的皮瓣向前翻，用纱布覆盖眼球避免压伤。	For the Soutar incision, the scalp is turned forward and a gauze is placed over the globes to prevent pressure injuries.
牢记面神经额支的位置避免造成麻痹。	The location of the frontalis nerve should be remembered to avoid its palsy.
切皮时保持颞肌完整。	The temporalis muscle is left intact during the skin incision.
将关键孔处皮肤翻起后，沿颧骨额突后缘和脂肪垫上的神经（小黑箭）切开关键孔上方的软组织，向后牵开肌肉保护面神经额支。	After mobilization of the skin over the area of the keyhole, the soft tissue over the keyhole is transected along the posterior edge of and parallel to the frontal process of the zygoma and the nerve on the fat pad (small black arrow), and muscle is reflected posteriorly to protect the frontalis nerve.
注意关键孔下缘的Penfield剥离子尖端。	Note the tip of the Penfield dissector at the lower edge of the keyhole.
要获得理想的暴露必须显露眶上缘。	The supraorbital rim must be exposed to gain the appropriate exposure.
骨膜单独分离，翻向前方并保持湿润。	The pericranium is elevated separately, reflected anteriorly, and kept moist.
鱼钩牵开器对于眉弓皮瓣最大程度的显露骨质极为重要。	Fishhook retractors are crucial for maximizing bony exposure for an eyebrow scalp flap.
此区域的皮肤具有一定活动性，能留出足够大的开颅范围。	The skin in this region is mobile and can allow for a sizable craniotomy.
仅在在颞肌下方的关键孔处钻一枚骨孔暴露额部硬膜。	A single burr hole is made under the temporalis muscle at the keyhole to expose the frontal dura.
骨孔的位置决定了开颅时磨平眶顶的难易程度。	The location of this burr hole will determine how easily the craniotomy can be created flush with the orbital roof.
如果需要做改良眶颧开颅，就改用正宗的MacCarty孔同时暴露额部硬膜和眼眶。	A true McCarty keyhole burr hole will expose the frontal dura, and the orbit and can be used to complete a modified orbitozygomatic osteotomy, if necessary.
剥离子伸进关键孔“感知”眶顶，引导下方的骨质切开尽量与眶顶平行。	A dissector can be used to “feel” the roof of the orbit through the keyhole to guide the inferior cut of the craniotomy parallel to the roof.
眉弓切口进行开颅要开得尽可能“高”。	The “tallest” craniotomy should be made through the eyebrow incision.
骨窗所能开的高度常常是眉弓切口眶上入路进行硬膜内操作的最大制约因素。	The height of the craniotomy is often the most limiting aspect of the supraorbital eyebrow incision during the intradural work.
可以使用导航避免开颅时开放额窦。	Navigation may be used to avoid violation of the frontal sinus with the craniotomy.
但是，保留额窦的完整不应以牺牲对骨质的磨除和暴露为代价。	However, bone removal and exposure should not be compromised at the expense of leaving the sinus intact.
图7：行Soutar切口时，抬起关键孔上方的颞肌（左图）保护面神经额支，有助于术后美观。	Figure 7: For a Soutar incision, the temporalis muscle is elevated over the keyhole (left image) to protect the frontalis nerve and provide a cosmetic closure.
行眉弓切口时，开颅只需打一枚骨孔（右图）。	A single burr hole is used for the craniotomy through the eyebrow incision (right image).
骨膜瓣备用以防开放额窦。	A pericranial flap is harvested because the frontal sinus may be encountered.
图8：翻开骨瓣，用侧刃钻头将额骨突出部分沿骨窗下缘磨除，使骨窗下缘与眶顶齐平。	Figure 8: After elevation of the bone flap, the overhanging portions of the frontal bone along the inferior edge of the craniotomy are drilled away with a side-cutting bit so that the inferior edge of the craniotomy is flush with the roof of the orbit.
对于主要向上方扩展的大型肿瘤，也可将眶缘移除，使由下向上的手术操作角度进一步扩大。	The orbital rim may also be removed to expand the inferior to superior operative trajectory for larger tumors with dominant superior extension.
U形剪开硬膜，基底朝向眶缘。	The dura is opened in a U-shaped fashion based on the orbital rim.
缝线固定硬膜，用腰大池引流或打开视神经颈内动脉区的脑池等适当的方法松弛脑组织，使额叶与颅底分开。	When the dura is secured with sutures, the frontal lobes will be mobilized away from the cranial base using appropriate methods of brain relaxation such as a lumbar drain and opening of the optico-carotid cisterns.
分离前部外侧裂，松解开视神经颈内动脉区的蛛网膜。	The anterior sylvian fissure is split and optico-carotid arachnoid membranes are released.
图9：常规悬吊硬膜防止出血，U型剪开硬膜。	Figure 9: Dural tack-up sutures are placed routinely to maintain hemostasis, and the dura is opened in a U-shape fashion.
硬膜朝面部翻开，保持湿润便于术后水密性缝合。	The dura is flapped down toward the face and kept moist to permit easier watertight closure at the end of the operation.
可以看到眉弓切口的主要局限在于骨窗的高度受限（上图），所以务必确保平行于眶顶的视角不能有额骨阻挡。	You can see that the main limitation of the eyebrow incision is the restricted height of the craniotomy (top). There should be no frontal bone obstructing the view parallel to the orbital roof.
图10：打开硬膜，轻柔地抬起额叶，在术野深处（上图）可见视神经与颈内动脉（黑箭）。	Figure 10: After the dural opening and gentle elevation of the frontal lobe, the optic nerve and the carotid artery (black arrow) are apparent at the depth of the operative field (top image).
高放大倍数下（下图），识别颈内动脉，A1和视神经。	At higher magnification (bottom image), the carotid artery, A1 branch, and optic nerve are identified.
本图显示了眉弓锁孔入路所能暴露颅底范围的全貌。	These images demonstrate the panorama of skull base exposed through the eyebrow keyhole craniotomy.
图11：避免使用固定脑压板以免损伤额叶底面皮层。	Figure 11: Avoidance of fixed retractors prevents cortical injury along the basal frontal lobe.
能看到一例大型前交通动脉瘤夹闭后额叶底面的情况。	You can see the condition of the basal frontal lobe after clip ligation of a large A-Comm aneurysm.
水密性连续缝合硬膜，额窦开放时尤须如此。	The dura is closed with a running suture in a watertight fashion, especially if the frontal sinus has been entered.
骨膜瓣可用于修补缝合硬膜或反转覆盖开放的额窦。	The pericranial flap may be used for dural closure or coverage of the frontal sinus opening.
若额窦未开放，硬膜水密性缝合并非必须。	Watertight dural closure is optional if the frontal sinus has not been entered.
图12：骨瓣还纳并用连接片固定，对开颅所致的骨瓣周缘的凹陷和缝隙进行修补，用图中的白色物质填充，最大程度恢复美观。	Figure 12: After the bone flap is replaced and fixed with bone plates, a cranioplasty (white material) is performed to fill in the depressions and gaps along the craniotomy edges and to maximize cosmesis.
连接片不应在额窦上方固定，因为固定钉会拧入额窦导致脑脊液漏。	The fixation plates should not be used over the region of the frontal sinus because the screws of the plate can invade the sinus and lead to a cerebrospinal fluid leak.
不必放置帽状腱膜下引流，常规缝皮。	A subgaleal drain is not implanted and the scalp is closed in the standard fashion.
小心对合皮缘，可吸收缝线无需打结过紧。	The skin edges are carefully approximated and not strangulated using absorbable sutures.
眉弓切口必须仔细缝合，确保获得可接受的外观效果。	The eyebrow incision must be carefully closed to ensure acceptable cosmetic results.
眶缘截骨术（或称额眶入路）	Orbital Rim Osteotomy or Fronto-Orbital Craniotomy
图13：眶缘截骨能扩大手术通道和由下向上的手术操作角度。	Figure 13: The osteotomy of the orbital rim can expand the operative corridor and the inferior-to-superior operative trajectory.
笔者用这种眶上开颅的改良形式处理向上方扩展的鞍旁病变或眶内靠上方的肿瘤。	I use this modified form of supraorbital craniotomy for parasellar lesions with superior extensions or superior intraorbital tumors.
截骨位置如图所示，一处恰在眶上切迹内侧，另一处在额颧缝上方；眶顶处予以折断。	The bony cuts (just medial to the supraorbital notch and above the frontozygomatic suture) are demonstrated; the roof of the orbit can be fractured.
深入的技术细节详见文后视频。	Please see the following videos for further technical details.
患者在重症监护室观察1-2天，之后转至普通病房。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit for 1-2 days and then transferred to the wards.
如果担心发生经额窦的脑脊液漏，术后可以保留腰大池引流1-2天。	The lumbar drain can be used for 1-2 days after surgery to help divert cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressures if there is a concern for CSF leakage through the frontal sinus.
因手术牵拉面神经额支导致患者出现短暂的额肌麻痹并不常见，通常这一症状会在4-6周之内缓解。	It is not uncommon for patients to suffer temporary frontalis palsy after surgery related to retraction of this nerve, but this weakness generally resolves in 4-6 weeks.
眶上神经分布区麻木是不良后果，应该在手术早期减少牵拉眶上神经来予以避免。	Numbness in the distribution of the supraorbital nerve is undesirable, and should be avoided during the early steps of the operation by minimizing traction on the nerve.
· 行眶上开颅时，患者头位须向后倾斜，充分利用重力的牵拉作用。	The patient’s head must be tilted back to take full advantage of gravity retraction during a supraorbital craniotomy.
· 移除眶上缘显著扩大了至前颅底的通路。	Removal of the supraorbital rim can significantly expand access to the anterior cranial base.
这种截骨术改善了由下向上的手术操作角度。	This osteotomy will improve the inferior-to-superior operative trajectory.
· 眉弓切口使很多种病变以微侵袭的方式得到显露。	An eyebrow incision allows exposure of a variety of lesions in a minimally invasive way.
这种显露不应仅是侵袭性最小，同时破坏性也要最小。	The exposure should be not only minimally invasive, but also minimally disruptive.
· 骨窗下缘必须与眶顶相齐平。	The inferior edge of the craniotomy should be flush with the roof of the orbit.
标准经岩骨后部开颅术	Conservative Posterior Petrosectomy
总论	General Considerations
岩骨后部磨除是经岩骨后入路显露过程中的关键步骤。	Posterior petrosectomy is the key component of the posterior petrosal approach.
其颅底骨质的磨除主要包括：（1）经颞部开颅术；（2）岩骨后部磨除术；（3）枕下开颅术三部分。	This skull base osteotomy is a combination of 1) temporal craniotomy, 2) posterior petrosectomy, and 3) suboccipital craniotomy.
经岩骨后入路需磨除部分岩锥以获得岩斜区、小脑前部以及第V到第X对颅神经之间脑干区域的显露。换言之，此手术入路可显露上至颅中窝硬膜下至颈静脉球的岩斜区。	Posterior petrosectomy involves partial resection of the petrous pyramid to allow access to the petroclival region, anterior cerebellum, and brainstem at the level of cranial nerves (CNs) V-X. In other words, this route facilitates access to the petroclival region bounded by the middle fossa dura superiorly and the jugular bulb inferiorly.
累及上述区域以上的岩斜区病变更适合采用经岩前入路。	Petroclival lesions above this level are more suited for an anterior petrosectomy.
而颈静脉结节水平以下的病变采用扩大的乙状窦后入路较容易到达。	Lesions below the level of the jugular tubercle can be readily reached through an expanded retromastoid exposure.
实质上，经岩骨后入路是以岩骨嵴为中心的一种手术入路，想对应的，翼点入路则是以蝶骨嵴为中心。	In essence, posterior petrosectomy is centered over the petrous ridge and is comparable to pterional approach that is based on the sphenoid ridge.
根据颞骨的磨除程度，经岩骨后入路有多种变异形式。	There are several variations of posterior petrosectomy that differ in the quantity of temporal bone resected.
逐步磨除颞骨可扩大腹侧手术暴露区域，同时会增加颅神经特别是CN.VII及CN.VIII损伤的风险。	Stepwise removal of the temporal bone expands the ventral operative trajectory, but also increases the risk of CN injury, particularly to CNs VII and VIII.
经岩骨后入路的变异形式根据骨质磨除的程度逐渐增加，至脑干前部的手术操作空间更加宽阔直接，沿桥小脑角依次有迷路后入路、部分经迷路入路、经迷路入路、经耳囊入路、经耳蜗入路。	Several expansive modifications of posterior petrosectomy can be defined based on a progressive increase in bone removal to allow a wider and more direct approach to the anterior brainstem along the cerebellopontine angle: retrolabyrinthine, transcrusal, translabyrinthine, transotic, and transcochlear.
经耳囊入路与经耳蜗入路会牺牲患者听力并有引起面神经损伤的风险。（表1）	The transotic and transcochlear approaches sacrifice hearing and are associated with a risk of facial nerve injury (Table 1).
图1. 乳突切除术，迷路后入路、迷路入路、经迷路入路及经耳蜗入路。	Figure 1: Mastoidectomy, retrolabyrinthine, partial labyrinthine, translabyrinthine, and transcochlear approaches have been demonstrated.
左上图示颞骨乳突及其浅表解剖结构。	The mastoid bone and its superficial anatomy are shown in the left upper photo.
Henle嵴位于外耳道后上缘，其深面为外侧半规管以及面神经鼓室段和乳突段连接处。	The spine of Henle is at the posterosuperior margin of the external meatus and superficial to the deep lateral semicircular canal and junction of the tympanic and mastoid segments of the facial nerve.
乳突上嵴约在横窦及乙状窦水平。	The supramastoid crest approximates the level of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses.
右上图示乳突切除后暴露颅中窝硬膜、乙状窦及颈静脉球；上述结构围成的乙状窦前硬膜空间为硬膜下操作的中心区域。	In the right upper photo, mastoidectomy has exposed the middle fossa dura, the sigmoid sinus and the jugular bulb; these structures form the borders of the presigmoid dura where intradural operative trajectory is centered.
窦脑膜角为乙状窦与中颅窝硬膜连接处。	The sinodural angle is where the sigmoid sinus meets the middle fossa dura.
左中图示迷路后结构，硬膜完全去除，可见桥小脑角区第V到第X颅神经。	In the left middle image, the retrolabyrinthine exposure is complete and the dura has been excised to reveal cranial nerves V to X within the cerebellopontine angle.
右中图示经迷路入路脑干腹侧观，并显露面神经内耳道段及迷路段。	In the right middle image, the translabyrinthine approach allows a more ventral view of the brainstem. Furthermore, the meatal and labyrinthine segments of the facial nerve are apparent.
左下图示经耳蜗入路，向后牵开面神经以便于磨除耳蜗，半规管与前庭也一并磨除。	In the left lower image, the facial nerve has been transposed posteriorly for removal of the cochlea in the transcochlear approach. The semicircular canals and vestibule have also been removed.
右下图示磨除耳蜗后可以进一步磨除残余的岩尖，清晰显示脑干前方结构。（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）	In the right lower image, removal of the cochlea allows resection of the remainder of the petrous apex, facilitating an unhindered view of the anterior brainstem (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
多数脑干偏侧占位性病变在瘤内减压后都可增加手术操作空间，因此经迷路后入路及经迷路入路对于多数横跨中线的靠前部的病变而言都有充足的术野。	Most operative extra-axial lesions displace the brainstem and provide additional working space after their decompression; therefore, the retrolabyrinthine and translabyrinthine approaches are usually adequate to access the anterior lesions crossing the midline.
此章节中，笔者将阐述包括迷路后入路联合颞下入路及枕下入路在内的改良的经岩骨后入路开颅术。	In this chapter, I attempt to describe a limited posterior petrosectomy involving the retrolabyrinthine approach in combination with subtemporal and suboccipital craniotomies.
这种改良的经岩骨后入路可以实现最少的骨质磨除，从而使听力损害及面神经损伤的风险降至最低。	This modification of posterior petrosectomy is the most conservative osteotomy and carries the lowest risk of hearing loss and facial nerve injury.
此手术入路主要的局限性为在多数患者中无法直接到达斜坡区，即斜坡中央凹陷区。	The main limitation of this approach is that in most patients, it does not provide direct access to the region of the clivus known as the central clival depression.
中央凹陷区为最接近内听道水平至颈静脉结节水平的斜坡中线区域。	The central clival depression is the area of the clivus nearest the midline between the intermeatal plane above and the jugular tubercles below.
岩斜角角度越小，则迷路后入路到达斜坡中央凹陷区的术野也越小。	Access to this area decreases via the retrolabyrinthine approach in individuals with more acute petroclival angles.
以笔者手术经验来看，在大多数情况下，瘤内减压后即可获得充足空间达脑干前部而无需前文中经岩骨后入路所描述的那样过多的进行骨质磨除。	In my experience, in most cases, intracapsular tumor decompression provides an ample amount of space to reach the anterior brainstem, with no need for more extensive bone removal as described for the other variations of posterior petrosectomy.
对于有明显斜坡中央凹陷区的患者，乙状窦后入路或远外侧经髁入路在实际操作中可以提供更为理想的手术角度。	In patients with a very pronounced central clival depression, the retrosigmoid or transcondylar approaches can, in fact, provide a more desirable operative working angle.
下一章节将重点讨论扩大经岩骨后入路，这一手术方式通过更多的岩骨骨质磨除以及轮廓化听器从而获得脑干前外侧更大的手术空间。	The next chapter of this volume focuses on a more extended posterior petrosectomy that via additional petrous drilling skeletonizes the hearing apparatus to provide a more anterolateral trajectory to the brainstem.
这种通过更多的岩锥骨质磨除扩大颅底显露的方法已经很少使用，并且这种入路难以避免的带来较高的术后死亡率。	The more expanded variations of this skull base approach through a radical petrous pyramid resection are rarely necessary and may lead to avoidable morbidity.
经岩骨后入路手术适应症	Indications for Posterior Petrosectomy
位于斜坡下1/3及枕骨大孔区的病变则更适于通过乙状窦后入路及/或远外侧经髁入路完成。	However, lesions along the lower third of the clivus and foramen magnum are more effectively exposed through the retrosigmoid and/or transcondylar corridors.
通过由下而上的手术操作通道，该手术入路可及幕上腹外侧脑干或中脑前方区域。	The supra­tentorial ventrolateral brainstem or anterior midbrain may be accessed through this approach via an inferior-to-superior working trajectory.
以往视交叉后的颅咽管瘤同样可应用该入路切除，但是随着神经内镜技术的发展，经鼻蝶入路已取代此手术方式。	Retrochiasmatic craniopharyngiomas were previously reached through this route. However, the endoscopic transnasal corridor has obviated the use of petrosectomy for this purpose.
对于表皮样囊肿而言，即使跨越中线或沿脑干腹侧走形，通过扩大的乙状窦后入路也可以进行手术切除。	Epidermoid tumors can be removed with relative ease through the extended retrosigmoid approach even if they cross the midline and center themselves along the ventral brainstem.
表皮样囊肿质地软，与周围结构粘连较少，因此即便是在相对狭小的操作空间内，仍能实现理想切除。	These tumors’ soft consistency and relative lack of adherence to the surrounding neurovascular structures allow the more limited approaches to perform adequately.
笔者一般应用经岩骨后入路及其扩大的变异形式切除斜坡中下2/3较大的脑膜瘤。	I use posterior petrosectomy and its extended variant for large meningiomas of the middle to lower two-thirds of the clivus.
至于其他病变，几乎都可以通过扩大的乙状窦后入路或远外侧经髁入路进行手术治疗。	Almost all other lesions can be handled via the extended retrosigmoid craniotomy or the conservative transcondylar osteotomy.
脑干实质水肿为不良征象，意味着肿瘤很有可能已经侵及软脑膜。	The presence of parenchymal edema in the brainstem is an ominous sign—it signifies a high risk of pial violation if the operator attempts gross total resection.
肿瘤侵及中线或对侧将增加手术的复杂程度。	Extension of the tumor to the midline or the contralateral side increases the technical complexity of the procedure.
肿瘤包绕基底动脉并不少见， 即便如此也不意味着血管周围蛛网膜间隙的消失。	Encasement of the basilar artery is not uncommon, and does not necessarily correlate with the absence of arachnoid planes around the artery.
CT扫描可显示肿瘤钙化的程度。	A computed tomography scan can define the degree of tumor calcification.
高度钙化的脑膜瘤因其质地较韧是极具挑战性的，若其被覆重要血管，则肿瘤全切非常困难。	Highly calcified meningiomas present a daunting challenge, and their encasement of the surrounding vital vessels should warn the surgeon against radical resection.
对于此类肿瘤，应行较为保守的肿瘤部分切除术以减轻其对于脑干的压迫。	Surgery on these tumors should be limited to conservative debulking and brainstem decompression.
笔者不主张脑膜瘤常规术前行介入栓塞肿瘤供血动脉，而对于颅后窝的颈静脉球肿瘤及血管外皮细胞瘤可进行术前栓塞。	I do not use preoperative embolization for meningiomas, but I do so for glomus jugulare tumors and hemangiopericytomas within the posterior fossa.
对于位置较深的颅后窝肿瘤，术中很难早期阻断肿瘤的血运。	The operator is often unable to devascularize deep-seated posterior fossa tumors early in surgery.
由于周围颅神经包绕，手术操作实属不易，并且在没有充分瘤内减压的情况下，很难在狭小的手术操作空间内移动肿瘤并显露肿瘤的基底。	They may be out of reach due to the surrounding cranial nerves and limited working space to mobilize the tumor and expose its base without its initial generous enucleation.
在这种情况下，可以考虑术前行介入栓塞。	This feature may encourage one to embolize the tumor preoperatively.
脑干听觉诱发反应及体感诱发电位监测常用于经岩骨后入路手术。	Brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) and somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) monitoring are used during the petrosectomy procedures.
对于特定患者可以使用面神经肌电监测及后组颅神经监测（包括带有肌电传感器的气管插管）。	Facial nerve electromyography and lower cranial nerves’ monitoring (including endotracheal tubes with electromyographic sensors) may be needed for select patients.
前移的Labbé静脉可能影响颞下入路显露，术前行CTA或者DSA检查有助于评估其位置。	A CT or catheter angiogram is beneficial in localizing displaced vascular anatomy and the location of the anteriorly displaced vein of Labbé that can affect the subtemporal trajectory.
此外，当需要剪开小脑幕时，较大的幕穿静脉会妨碍入路，此时可选择联合入路避免剪开小脑幕。	In addition, the presence of major veins traversing the tentorium discourages a posterior approach during which the tentorium would need to be sectioned. Alternatively, combined approaches obviating the need for tentorial sectioning are recommended.
熟练掌握颞骨解剖至关重要。	The detailed anatomy of the temporal bone is relevant.
为顺利完成经颞入路手术，术者需在解剖实验室练习并积累颞骨磨除的经验，快速高质量的完成该入路的显露过程。	The surgeon needs to gain extensive experience in the laboratory with temporal bone drilling to effectively perform transtemporal approaches.
在磨除岩骨时，可请耳外科医师会诊以保证手术顺利完成。	The participation of our otologist colleagues during the procedure and specifically during the petrosecotmy stage is recommended.
图2. 右侧经岩骨后入路或乙状窦前入路联合颞下入路。	Figure 2: Surgical steps for a right-sided posterior petrosal or presigmoid approach combined with a subtemporal extension are demonstrated.
乳突磨除后显示乙状窦前硬膜。基础及扩大经岩骨后入路乳突磨除术的差异主要在于对容纳半规管的密致骨的磨除范围（上图）。	The mastoidectomy will reveal the presigmoid dura, and the extent of drilling of the dense cortical bone housing the semicircular canals determines the difference between the standard (conservative) and extended posterior petrosal approaches (upper images).
右上图示颞骨相关解剖结构。	The relevant anatomy of the temporal bone is depicted in the right upper image.
面神经鼓室段走形于外半规管的下方。	The tympanic segment of the facial nerve travels inferior to the lateral canal.
左下图示显露出硬脑膜。	The initial dural exposure is demonstrated (left lower image).
右下图示剪开硬脑膜并保护Labbé静脉。	The vein of Labbé is protected during dural incisions (right lower image).
需注意以上照片显示的迷路后入路，骨质磨除范围比下文手术示意图中磨除范围大（类似于扩大经岩骨后入路）。（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）	Please note that the demonstrated retrolabyrinthine approach in these photos requires more aggressive bone resection (similar to the one for the extended posterior petrosectomy) than the approach illustrated in the operative sketches below (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3. 右侧Trautmann三角（虚线范围）位置及与周围结构关系。	Figure 3: The location of a right-sided Trautmann’s triangle (marked by the hashed line) and its relationship to the surrounding structures is shown.
经岩骨后入路显露过程中需首先磨除此区域骨质。	Removal of the bone over this triangle is the principle maneuver executed during the petrosal approach.
图4. 左侧经岩骨后入路或乙状窦前入路骨质磨除过程中硬膜外（左图）及硬膜下（右图）显露的结构。（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）	Figure 4: Extradural (left image) and intradural (right image) exposures through a left-sided posterior petrosectomy or presigmoid osteotomy are shown (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
基本经岩骨后入路	CONSERVATIVE POSTERIOR PETROSECTOMY
经岩骨后入路手术操作空间较为狭小，在到达桥小脑角池释放脑脊液之前需要在硬膜外牵开颞叶及小脑。	The operative corridor through the posterior transpetrosal approach is narrow, requiring extradural retraction of the temporal lobe and cerebellum during bone work before reaching the cerebellopontine angle cisterns to drain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
在手术开始前，强烈建议行腰穿置管。	Consequently, intraoperative implantation of a lumbar drain before skin incision should be strongly considered.
无论肿瘤体积及其占位效应大小，笔者至今尚未遇到因腰穿置管而导致脑疝的病例。	I have not experienced any complication such as herniation syndromes related to the use of a lumbar drain, regardless of the large size of the tumor and the associated mass effect.
在颅骨钻孔及去骨瓣时缓慢的释放脑脊液。	Gradual CSF drainage is used during burr hole placement and elevation of the bone flap.
此操作可降低颅内压，有利于静脉窦自颅骨内面的游离并保护其在骨质磨除过程中免受损伤。	This decrease in intracranial tension facilitates mobilization of the dura and its associated venous sinuses away from the inner skull surface and protects them during bone work.
笔者在切皮时将脑脊液引流量控制在20ml，之后在颅中窝及颅后窝操作时再引流40ml（可根据情况上下浮动10ml）以降低硬膜张力。	I drain 20cc of CSF upon completion of the skin incision and then drain up to 40 cc more (in 10-cc aliquots) as necessary to achieve adequate dural relaxation during bone work and manipulation of the dura along the middle and posterior fossae.
在此情况下，可不使用固定的牵开器以及包括甘露醇在内的利尿剂。	This maneuver obviates the need for fixed retractors and diuretics, including mannitol.
患者取仰卧位，上半身稍抬高以利于静脉回流。	The patient is positioned supine on the operating room table. The thorax should be slightly elevated to promote venous drainage.
同侧肩下垫肩垫，头部偏向对侧，矢状缝大致平行于地面。	A shoulder roll is placed under the patient’s contralateral shoulder and the patient's head is rotated until the sagittal suture is nearly parallel with the floor.
在患者颈部条件允许时可将头部旋转至70°。	If the patient has a supple neck, up to 70 degrees of rotation may be applied.
若患者颈部不易旋转，可加厚肩垫。	If the patient has limited neck mobility, the size of the shoulder roll can be increased to compensate for the limited neck rotation.
图5. 患者体位、头位及切口。	Figure 5: Patient position, skull clamp fixation, and skin incision are illustrated.
颅骨钻孔、骨瓣及相关静脉窦位置如图所示。	The locations of the burr holes and craniotomy in relation to the dural venous sinuses are evident.
患者头部轻微下垂以使颧骨位于术野最高点。	The vertex of the head is tilted slightly toward the floor until the zygoma is the highest point on the operative field.
头架的头钉应远离切口，笔者习惯于将一个头钉置于额部，另外两个头钉平行于矢状缝置于枕部。	The skull clamp pins are positioned so the pins stay away from the outlines of the incision. I place the single pin anteriorly over the frontal area and the two-pin rocker arm low on the occipital bone and parallel to the sagittal plane.
经岩骨后入路切口一般从颧弓水平约耳屏前1cm开始，类圆形走形于耳上3-4cm，乳突后4cm下降，显露枕骨。	The usual incision for posterior petrosectomy starts at the level of the zygoma, approximately 1 cm anterior to the tragus. It circles 3-4 cm above the ear, and descends 4 cm behind the mastoid process, exposing the suboccipital bone.
根据肿瘤侵及颅中窝的程度调整颞骨骨瓣的大小。	The extent of temporal bone work can be tailored based on the extension of the tumor into the middle fossa.
图6. 将皮瓣翻向前下，显露颞肌筋膜及帽状腱膜之间的自然界面。	Figure 6: The scalp flap is reflected anteroinferiorly and the natural plane between the temporalis fascia and galea is developed.
沿切口边缘切开骨膜及颞肌筋膜，使其与肌肉分离。	The pericranium and temporal fascia is incised along the edges of the incision and separated from the muscle.
此骨膜瓣将胸锁乳突肌自上项线上游离，即切开胸锁乳突肌在乳突上的附着处。	This pericranial flap is further dissected beyond the superior nuchal line in continuity with the sternocleidomastoid muscle, which is released from its insertion on the mastoid bone.
运用这种技巧，皮瓣将富于血管，在手术结束时可用于颅底重建。	This technique provides a large, vascularized fascial/pericranial flap that can be used for skull base reconstruction at the end of the operation.
将颞肌自颅骨分离并翻向前下方。	The temporal muscle is then detached from the bone and also reflected anteroinferiorly.
分离附着在乳突及上项线上的肌肉，显露枕下颅骨。	Other muscle attachments on the mastoid and superior nuchal line are also released to gain exposure for the suboccipital craniotomy.
图7. 经岩骨后入路开颅包括颞骨及枕骨下两部分。	Figure 7: The craniotomy for posterior petrosal approach includes both a temporal and a suboccipital component.
笔者一般钻孔4个，分为两组，分列横窦两侧。	I make four burr holes, two sets on each side of the transverse sinus.
第一组的第一个孔在星点内下侧，经此孔可及幕下。	The first burr hole is placed immediately medial and inferior to the asterion. This burr hole gives access to the infratentorial compartment.
第二个孔在鳞部与顶乳缝的连接处（上图及中图）。	The second burr hole is made at the junction of the squamous and parietomastoid sutures (upper and middle images).
此孔可及幕上部分。	This burr hole provides access to the supratentorial compartment.
两孔之间为横窦与乙状窦交汇处。	The space between these two burr holes contains the transverse-sigmoid junction.
第二组钻孔更靠近中线，均分在上项线上方及下方，位于横窦两侧。	A second set of burr holes is placed more medially above and below the superior nuchal line, flanking the transverse sinus.
使用铣刀行颞下及枕下乙状窦后开颅。	A high-speed drill with a foot attachment is used to elevate subtemporal and suboccipital-retromastoid craniotomies.
由于硬膜窦常与颅骨内面紧密附着，因此在硬膜窦处避免使用铣刀。	I avoid the use of the footplate attachment over the dural sinuses since these sinuses are often embedded in the inner surface of the skull bone and tenaciously adherent.
下图主要显示此区域骨缝相关解剖。（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）	The anatomy of the sutures in the region is further depicted in the lower image (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图8. 笔者使用切削钻“蛋壳技术”磨除钻孔之间硬膜窦表面的骨质，之后使用咬骨钳缓慢分离窦壁与颅骨内板，将剩余骨质咬除。	Figure 8: I “eggshell” the bone between the burr holes and overlying the venous sinuses using a side-cutting burr (B1 without a footplate). I then slowly detach the sinus wall from the inner skull table and remove the remaining bone over the sinuses using a Kerrison rongeur (inset).
小心取下骨瓣。	The bone flap is then carefully elevated.
通常情况下静脉窦小的损伤出血可使用速即纱(SurgicelFibrillar,Ethicon,Somerville,NJ)覆盖。	Minor injuries to the venous sinus can usually be covered and not aggressively packed with hemostatic material (Surgicel Fibrillar, Ethicon, Somerville, NJ).
较大缺损可使用局部硬膜修复。	Larger tears require primary repair using a local dural flap.
静脉窦不可封堵以防止栓塞。	Again, the lumen of the sinus should not be packed to avoid its thrombosis.
乳突骨质磨除相对困难，需要使用金刚砂磨钻。	The osteotomy over the mastoid bone can be less straightforward, requiring the use of a round side-cutting burr.
乳突切除术	Mastoidectomy
此部分笔者与耳外科医生合作完成。	I collaborate with my otology colleagues for matoidectomy.
图9. 此入路第二部分内容为乳突切除术。	Figure 9: The second component of this approach is an almost complete mastoidectomy.
首先使用高速颅钻及吸引器磨除乳突表面的骨质。	The first step is decortication of the mastoid surface using a high-speed cutting burr and continuous suction irrigation.
在需磨除的骨质上界和前界磨除两道骨槽以初步确定磨除的范围，上槽自颧弓根部延伸至星点，位于颞下线下方，前槽自外耳道后缘延伸至乳突尖。	Troughs are created to outline the superior and anterior limits of the mastoidectomy. The superior trough extends from the zygomatic root to the asterion, just inferior to the infratemporal line. The anterior trough extends from the posterior rim of the external auditory meatus down to the mastoid tip.
去除此范围内的乳突气房，磨除骨槽的过程中需要保持深度一致。	The mastoid air cells are removed within these limits. Drilling should take place at an even depth throughout the process of drilling.
磨除乙状窦表面乳突气房的密致骨。	The cortical bone over the sigmoid sinus is identified as the air cells are removed.
耳外科医师通常对此部分较为熟悉。	My neuro-otologist usually performs this part of the procedure.
图10. 充分轮廓化乙状窦后，磨除乙状窦前方的乳突气房以显露颅中窝及颅后窝硬膜。	Figure 10: Once the sigmoid sinus is fully skeletonized, additional air cells anterior to the sigmoid sinus are removed to expose the dura of the middle and posterior fossae.
保留乙状窦表面附着的岛状骨皮质以尽可能减少对于此静脉结构的损伤。	Small islands of thin adherent cortical bone are left on the sinus to minimize injury to this important venous structure.
继续磨除骨质直至显露颅中窝硬膜。	Bone removal is continued until the middle fossa dura is exposed.
乳突切除术中可使用较小的切削钻以便于磨除更深的结构。	Smaller cutting burrs are employed as mastoidectomy proceeds and the deeper structures are reached.
乙状窦下方靠近颈静脉球，显露乙状窦下段及二腹肌嵴。	The sigmoid sinus is followed inferiorly to near the jugular bulb, exposing the inferior segment of the sigmoid sinus and digastric ridge.
面神经走形于外侧半规管下缘至位于二腹肌嵴前缘的茎乳孔出颅。	The facial nerve courses along the inferior edge of the lateral semicircular canal into the stylomastoid foramen located just anterior to the digastric ridge.
面神经走形于密质骨中的面神经管内。	The facial nerve is embedded in the cortical bone of the fallopian canal.
如非必须显露颈静脉孔，无需轮廓化面神经。	There is no need to skeletonize the facial nerve unless exposure of the jugular foramen is desired.
将乙状窦自乙状窦与岩上窦汇合处至颈静脉球水平表面的骨质完全磨除。	The sigmoid sinus is now unroofed from its confluence with the superior petrosal sinus superiorly all the way to the level of the jugular bulb inferiorly.
若患者颈静脉球位置较高，意味着乙状窦前手术空间有限，则需要考虑使用其他手术入路。	Patients with a “high-riding” jugular bulb will provide a limited presigmoid working window and alternative operative corridors besides the posterior petrosal route should be considered.
图11. 图示Trautmann三角处的骨质已被磨除。	Figure 11: Removal of the bone over the Trautmann’s triangle is shown.
将窦脑膜角处覆盖乙状窦前硬膜的骨质磨除后，暴露Trautmann三角。	The bone covering the presigmoid dura at the sinodural angle is removed (upper image), exposing the Trautmann’s triangle.
Trautmann三角为后颅窝硬膜区域，其下界为颈静脉球，上界为岩上窦，前界为骨迷路，后界为乙状窦。（中下图中虚线区域）	This triangle is an area of the posterior fossa dura bounded inferiorly by the jugular bulb, superiorly by the superior petrosal sinus, anteriorly by the bony labyrinth, and posteriorly by the sigmoid sinus (hashed area in the middle and inferior images).
磨除乙状窦前骨质直至后半规管被覆的密致骨。	Bone resection anterior to the sigmoid sinus can progress forward until the cortical bone over the posterior semicircular canals is encountered.
颈静脉球周围骨质无需过分磨除，因其可能导致颈静脉球及面神经的损伤。	Aggressive drilling around the jugular bulb is unnecessary and can lead to injury of the jugular bulb or facial nerve.
笔者认为，显露Trautmann三角即代表经典经迷路后入路开颅显露的完成。	Once I have achieved exposure of the Trautmann’s triangle, the conservative retrolabyrinthine petrosectomy is considered complete.
在非扩大迷路后入路中，保留听力为重要目标，因此不建议过度轮廓化骨迷路。	In this form of nonextended retrolabyrinthine approach, hearing preservation is an important goal, and aggressive skeletonization of the bony labyrinth is not attempted.
若不慎破坏迷路骨质，而膜迷路保留完整，可用少量筋膜覆盖缺损处以保留前庭功能。	If an accidental disruption of the bony labyrinth occurs but the membranous labyrinth is intact, a piece of fascia may be used to cover the defect to preserve vestibular function.
若骨迷路及膜迷路同时破坏，必须使用小块骨蜡修补缺损处。	However, if both the bony and membranous components of the labyrinth are transected, a small piece of wax must be inserted in the defect.
此种情况下有极高的风险不仅会造成失聪而且会导致眩晕。	In this situation, postoperative vertigo and/or hearing loss can be expected.
需要轮廓化迷路的扩大迷路后入路相关内容请参见《扩大经岩骨后入路》。	For an extended retrolabyrinthine approach that includes skeletonization of the labyrinth, refer to the chapter on Extended Posterior Petrosectomy.
切开硬脑膜（包括小脑幕）	Dural opening involves the transection of the tentorium.
图12. 首先平行于乙状窦前方由颈静脉球向岩上窦方向切开颅后窝硬膜。	Figure 12: Next, the posterior fossa dura is incised, anterior and parallel to the sigmoid sinus, extending from the jugular bulb to the superior petrosal sinus.
在后半规管下方可见白色增厚的硬膜区域，即为内淋巴囊。	The endolymphatic sac will be visible inferior to the posterior semicircular canal as a white, thick area of the dura.
此为后颅窝硬膜显露的前界，为避免患者失聪，应注意保护此结构。	This structure is usually the anterior limit of the dural exposure and should be preserved to avoid hearing loss.
若切开硬膜时伤及内淋巴囊而内淋巴管保留完好，则仍有保留听力的可能。	If the dural incision violates the endolymphatic sac, the patient’s hearing may still remain intact if the endolymphatic duct is spared.
图13. 沿颞窝底向后至岩上窦水平做第二段硬膜切开。	Figure 13: The second segment of the dural incision follows the floor of the temporal fossa and is continued posteriorly to the level of the superior petrosal sinus.
为避免Labbé静脉的损伤，笔者稍剪开硬膜，向硬膜下探查此静脉汇入横窦或岩上窦的位置。	To prevent injury to the vein of Labbé, I cut the dura in small increments and inspect the subdural space for the entry point of the vein into the transverse or superior petrosal sinuses.
图14.分离、电凝或银夹夹闭岩上窦。	Figure 14: The superior petrosal sinus is now isolated, coagulated, or ligated with Weck clips.
为保证Labbé静脉等颞部主要静脉的回流，夹闭点需在其汇入横窦-乙状窦的前方。	The point where the sinus is divided must be anterior to the insertion point of the temporal lobe’s draining veins (including the vein of Labbé) to preserve their outflow into the transverse-sigmoid sinuses.
若Labbé静脉从显露区域经过，可部分松解移动，使其远离操作区域。	If the vein of Labbé crosses the area of exposure, it can be partially untethered, mobilized, and protected.
术前CTA/MRV评估颞叶静脉回流方式有助于判断切开小脑幕的安全区域。	Preoperative assessment of the temporal lobe’s venous drainage patterns using CT/catheter angiography or magnetic resonance venography is beneficial in tailoring the safe zones for tentorial transection.
若岩上窦与静脉回流区域位置紧密，沿小脑幕中份至岩上窦做切口可保留此窦，于窦周形成一个空间有限的至岩斜区的手术通道。	If the superior petrosal sinus is intimately involved with the venous drainage of the region, an incision along the tentorium medial to the superior petrosal sinus will spare this sinus and allow an operative corridor, albeit limited, to the petroclival region around the sinus.
图15.离断岩上窦后，平行于岩锥后缘向小脑幕切迹方向剪开小脑幕。	Figure 15: After the superior petrosal sinus is divided, the dural incision is continued on the tentorium parallel to the posterior edge of the petrous pyramid toward the tentorial incisura.
由于此区域暴露较大，很容易在剪开硬膜时偏后。	It is often tempting to incise the tentorium more posteriorly because of the wider exposure in that region.
如果小脑幕切开位置过于靠后（并且没有平行于岩锥）则会形成小脑幕幕瓣阻碍手术通道。	Completing the dural incision more posteriorly (and not along the petrous pyramid) will lead to a tentorial flap along the ridge that may limit the surgical corridor.
图16.在切断小脑幕内侧缘之前需要辨别滑车神经进入硬膜的位置。	Figure 16: Before the medial edge of the tentorium is transected, CN IV must be identified to the point where it enters the dura.
为保护此神经，笔者在其进入幕缘处之后切开小脑幕。	To protect this nerve, I cut the tentorium posterior to the point where the nerve enters the tentorial edge.
图17.接下来使用牵开器抬起颞叶及后份小脑幕瓣，另一牵开器向下牵开小脑。	Figure 17: The posterior tentorial flap is then elevated with the temporal lobe and held in place using a retractor blade. Another retractor blade holds the cerebellum inferiorly.
悬吊乙状窦前硬膜、颞侧硬膜及小脑幕。	The presigmoid dura, temporal dura, and tentorium are retracted using retention sutures.
为使显露区域最大化，悬吊时缝线位置尽可能深及骨缘。	Note that the sutures are placed as deep as possible and close to the petrous edge to maximize exposure.
图18.轻微后拉乙状窦，可见脑干腹外侧及岩斜区颅神经根的全景。	Figure 18: Gentle posterior retraction of the sigmoid sinus allows a direct panoramic view of the anterolateral brainstem and the origins of the cranial nerves along the petroclival space.
如上文所述，一般情况下瘤内减压后可以扩大手术操作空间，因而无需过大范围的骨质磨除。	As mentioned above, more extensive bone resection of the labyrinth is usually not necessary to remove lesions along the anterolateral brainstem because the operator can typically expand the operative corridor through lesional intracapsular decompression.
切除病变后逐层关颅。	Following surgical treatment of the pathology at hand, closure begins.
最大程度的严密缝合硬膜，但“不透水”的方式严密缝合硬膜往往十分困难，需采取相关手段进一步防止术后脑脊液漏。	The dura is approximated primarily, but watertight closure is not feasible and additional measures are taken to prevent CSF leakage.
使用骨蜡严密封闭所有暴露的气房，在硬膜缺损处填补脂肪组织或筋膜密封缺损。	All exposed air cells are meticulously waxed, and strips of adipose tissue or fascia lata are placed across the dural opening to seal the dural defect.
另外，暴露操作时取下的带血管蒂的骨膜瓣可用于封堵硬膜缺损。	Additionally, the vascularized periosteal flap that was harvested during exposure is used to cover the defect in the dura.
钛钉钛板复位固定骨瓣，后续步骤按常规关颅。	The bone flap is replaced and secured using miniplates, and the rest of closure is conducted in a standard fashion.
手术完成后持续腰穿引流48小时，引流量约8ml/h。	A lumbar drain is continued to remove 8cc/hour of CSF for 48 hours after surgery.
患者术后需尽早下床活动。	Patients are mobilized as soon as possible.
· 即便是在颅底手术病例数量较多的情况下，经岩骨后入路仍然较少使用。	Posterior petrosectomy is rarely needed, even in a busy skull base surgery practice.
乙状窦后入路及其充分显露乙状窦的扩大入路和经小脑幕入路一般情况下即有充足空间显露岩斜区肿瘤。	Retromastoid craniotomy and its expansion through unroofing of the sigmoid sinus and the transtentorial routes typically allows adequate exposure of some petroclival tumors.
而经岩骨后入路更适合处理质地较韧、血运丰富的脑膜瘤，采取此入路可以在最小的脑组织牵拉的前提下第一时间阻断肿瘤血运。	Nonetheless, a petrosectomy provides the surgeon with multiple flexible operative working angles to handle a fibrous and vascular meningioma. This corridor leads to tumor devascularization early in surgery while minimizing brain retraction.
· 使用腰穿脑脊液引流可降低颅内压，从而在开颅显露时较容易分离静脉窦和颅骨内侧面。	The use of lumbar CSF drainage facilitates intracranial decompression, therefore expediting dissection of the dural venous sinuses away from the inner skull during craniotomy and bone work.
· 与耳外科良好合作非常重要。	Collaboration with our otology colleagues is paramount during execution of mastoidectomy while protecting the labyrinth.
· 与横窦不同，乙状窦一般嵌入颅骨内。	Unlike the transverse sinus, the sigmoid sinus is embedded in the skull bone;
因此骨质磨除时更需小心谨慎以保护乙状窦。	patience and meticulous bone drilling is require for its preservation.
必要情况下可保留乙状窦表面的薄层骨质以最大化保护此结构。	If necessary, a thin shell of bone should be left on the sigmoid sinus to maximize its protection.
· T剪开小脑幕是应尽可能贴近岩骨嵴以避免产生过大的小脑幕幕瓣阻碍手术通道。	The incision along the tentorium should be completed as close to the petrous ridge as possible to avoid creation of a sizable tentorial flap that could interfere with the operative corridor.
扩大经岩骨后开颅术	Extended Posterior Petrosectomy
根据岩骨磨除的程度，经岩骨后入路有多种变异形式，主要有岩骨后入路和乙状窦前入路两种。	There are several variations of the posterior transpetrosal approach (posterior petrosectomy or presigmoid approach) that differ in the magnitude of petrous pyramid osteotomy.
对耳囊（译者注：乳突腔的内侧界由骨密质构成，即耳囊，内有骨迷路）较大范围的磨除可以获得更好的脑干前外侧和斜坡内侧的显露。	The progressive degrees of bone removal of the otic capsule provide some advantages, mostly for gaining further access to the anterolateral brainstem and medial clivus.
与颞下入路相结合时，岩骨后部的磨除可以显露上达滑车神经（CNIV）下至颈静脉结节的区域。	When combined with a subtemporal approach, the posterior petrosectomy expands the exposure as high as CN IV and as low as the jugular tubercle.
这一章中，笔者主要介绍扩大经岩骨后入路的操作要点。	In this chapter, I will describe the techniques for extended posterior petrosectomy.
总论及起始操作步骤请参考《标准经岩骨后入路》相关章节。	Please refer to the chapter on conservative posterior petrosectomy for general considerations and the initial stages of exposure.
扩大经岩骨后入路适应症	Indications for Extended Posterior Petrosectomy
对于小而质软的肿瘤，标准经岩骨后入路及充分的瘤内减压可以在不过度牵拉脑组织的前提下，有充分的手术角度和空间到达脑干前部区域。	In some cases involving small and soft tumors, conservative petrosectomy followed by aggressive intracapsular tumor decompression provides adequate working angles to reach the anterior brainstem without significant brain retraction.
在这种情况下，可以避免如下文所述更多大范围的磨除岩骨。	These working angles obviate the need for a more extensive osteotomy as described in the following section.
对于不累及幕上的皮样囊肿及质地软或小到中等大小的脑膜瘤等岩斜区肿瘤而言，乙状窦后入路是理想的手术路径。	I believe the extended retrosigmoid route provides a reasonable operative corridor for accessing some petroclival tumors, including epidermoid and soft or small to moderate size meningiomas without supratentorial extension.
然而对于幕上下同时受累、质地较韧、血运丰富或者部分钙化的岩斜区脑膜瘤，则需要扩展手术角度及空间分离肿瘤周围的血管神经结构。	However, multicompartmental fibrous, vascular, and/or partially calcified petroclival meningiomas with both supratentorial and infratentorial extensions require extended operative angles and space for dissection of neurovascular structures.
这种情况下，扩大经岩骨后入路则为更佳选择。	In these circumstances, the extended petrosal approach is preferred.
对乳突骨质及耳囊局部解剖细节的理解对于岩骨磨除来说至关重要。	A detailed understanding of the mastoid bone and otic capsule is important for petrous bone drilling.
图1. 图示左侧颞骨乳突部的结构细节。	Figure 1: The anatomy of the left mastoid bone is detailed.
乳突房部的显露及外耳道的位置。	The exposure of the antrum highlights the location of the lateral canal.
外耳道后上缘的Henle外耳道上嵴为鼓索及外侧半规管等深部结构的浅表标志（上图）。	The spine of Henle at the posterosuperior margin of the external meatus is a superficial landmark that approximates the deeper lateral semicircular canal and tympanic segment of the facial nerve (upper image).
进一步地磨除乳突骨质后可见后外半规管及鼓索和面神经乳突段。	Additional bone drilling and mastoidectomy exposes the capsule of the posterior and lateral canals and the tympanic and mastoid facial segments.
在扩大岩后入路中需要磨除上述骨质（下图）。	This is the extent of bony removal required for an extended posterior petrosectomy (lower image).
无需完全轮廓化面神经（译者注：轮廓化-以金刚砂磨钻尽可能薄的磨除神经及血管表面的骨质）（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）。	Skeletonization of the facial nerve is not necessary (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图2. 轮廓化左侧半规管扩大了乙状窦前间隙。	Figure 2: Skeletonization of the left semicircular canals provides an expanded trajectory along the presigmoid space.
剪开硬脑膜时需注意上述标志。	Note the markings for dural incisions.
在乙状窦前剪开硬脑膜时需避免损伤内淋巴囊。（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）	The endolymphatic sac is protected during the presigmoid dural incision (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3. 剪开硬脑膜并将乙状窦轻微牵开后可见至桥小脑角区的手术入路（上图）。	Figure 3: Upon dural opening and gentle retraction of the sigmoid sinus, one can see the operative route toward the cerebellopontine angle (upper image).
放大图示相关颅神经。（图片由ALRhoton,Jr提供）	The expanded view of the relevant cranial nerves is shown (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
扩大经岩骨后入路手术步骤	EXTENDED POSTERIOR PETROSAL APPROACH
起始步骤请参见章节《标准经岩骨后入路》。	For the initial steps of this procedure, please refer to the chapter on conservative posterior petrosectomy.
图4. 在磨除乳突彻底显露右侧乙状窦后，继续磨除乙状窦前的乳突气房，显露颅中窝及颅后窝硬脑膜。	Figure 4: Once the right sigmoid sinus is fully uncovered through mastoidectomy, additional air cells anterior to the sigmoid sinus are removed to expose the dura of the middle and posterior fossae.
保留乙状窦表面岛状附着的骨皮质，尽可能减少对于此静脉结构的损伤。	Small islands of thin adherent cortical bone are left on the sigmoid sinus to minimize injury to this important venous structure.
图5. 下一步是沿颅中窝板及内听道后壁，通过残留的上乳突气房辨认鼓室窦（译者注：鼓室窦位于颞骨乳突部内，是一个开口于鼓室的气化空间，约位于道上三角的深面1.5cm，道上三角为颞骨乳突表面的一个凹陷，位于外耳道后上缘，乳突上嵴和沿外耳道后缘的垂直切线之间）。	Figure 5: The next step is to identify the antrum by following the middle fossa plate and posterior internal auditory canal wall through the remaining superior mastoid air cells.
鼓室窦在Henle外耳道上嵴深部约15mm。	The antrum is located about 15 mm deep to the spine of Henle;
外侧半规管在鼓室窦的深部。	the lateral semicircular canal is located deep to the antrum.
在鼓室窦深面，砧骨窝中可以辨别砧骨短突。	In the depth of the antrum, the short process of the incus is identified in the fossa incudis.
磨钻不可接触砧骨，因其震动可传至内耳导致患者失聪。	The burr should not contact the incus because the vibrations can be transmitted to the patient’s inner ear structures and cause hearing loss.
在磨除乳突尖气房后乙状窦下方就不会再有骨质覆盖，显露乙状窦下段及二腹肌嵴。	The sigmoid sinus is unroofed inferiorly and the air cells of the mastoid tip are drilled away, exposing the inferior segment of the sigmoid sinus and digastric ridge.
面神经在二腹肌嵴前方沿外侧半规管下缘至茎乳孔出颅。	The facial nerve courses from the inferior edge of the lateral semicircular canal toward the stylomastoid foramen, located just anterior to the digastric ridge.
除非需要显露颈静脉孔，否则无需轮廓化面神经。	There is no need to skeletonize the facial nerve unless exposure of the jugular foramen is desired.
辨认面神经走形后，进一步骨质磨除需确认上半规管和后半规管位置。	After the trajectory of the facial nerve has been identified, the positions of the superior and posterior semicircular canals are confirmed through further drilling.
骨半规管存在于骨密质围成的腔中。	These canals are covered by dense cortical bone.
轮廓化骨迷路需要在高倍镜视野下使用金刚砂磨钻来完成。	At higher magnification, the bony labyrinth is skeletonized using a diamond burr.
窦脑膜角表面的骨质被磨除后，可以显露Trautmann三角。此三角区下界为颈静脉球，上界为岩上窦，前界为骨迷路，后界为乙状窦。	Next, the bone covering the presigmoid dura at the sinodural angle is removed, exposing Trautmann’s triangle, an area of posterior fossa dura bounded inferiorly by the jugular bulb, superiorly by the superior petrosal sinus, anteriorly by the bony labyrinth, and posteriorly by the sigmoid sinus.
有关Trautmann三角的细节解剖结构请参考《标准经岩骨后入路》章节	Please refer to the chapter on conservative posterior petrosectomy for further details on the anatomy of the Trautmann’s triangle.
迷路后入路手术中需要注意保留患者听力，不可伤及骨迷路。	During the retrolabyrinthine approach, hearing preservation is the goal. The bony labyrinth must not be violated.
若不慎破坏迷路骨质，而膜迷路保留完整，可用少量骨蜡或筋膜覆盖缺损处。	If an accidental disruption of the bone occurs but the membranous labyrinth remains intact, a small amount of bone wax or fascia can be used to cover the defect.
若骨迷路及膜迷路同时破坏，必须使用小块肌肉修补缺损处防止周围及内淋巴液漏出。此种情况下有极高的风险不仅会造成失聪而且会导致眩晕。	However, if both the bony and membranous components of the labyrinth are transected, a small piece of muscle must be inserted in the defect to prevent peri- and endolymph leakage; there is high risk of not only hearing loss, but also vertigo.
硬膜的打开方式需满足最大程度利用硬膜内空间这一要求。	The dural opening should maximize the intradural operative trajectory.
图6. 首先平行于乙状窦前方由颈静脉球向岩上窦方向打开颅后窝硬膜。	Figure 6: The posterior fossa dura is opened first anterior and parallel to the sigmoid sinus, extending from the jugular bulb to the superior petrosal sinus.
此为后颅窝硬膜暴露的前界，为避免患者失聪，应注意保护此结构。	This structure is the anterior limit of the posterior fossa dural exposure and should be preserved to avoid hearing loss.
若切开硬膜时伤及内淋巴囊而内淋巴管保留完整，则仍有保留听力的可能。	If the dural incision violates the endolymphatic sac, hearing may still remain intact if the endolymphatic duct is spared.
后半规管下部的后方即为内淋巴管。	The endolymphatic duct is located posterior to the inferior portion of the posterior semicircular canal.
图7. 沿颞窝底顺横窦方向做第二段硬膜切开。	Figure 7: The second segment of the dural incision follows the floor of the temporal fossa and is continued toward the transverse sinus.
此步操作需格外谨慎，需注意硬膜下以防伤及Labbé静脉。	This opening must be performed carefully and the subdural space should be examined to prevent injury to the wandering vein of Labbé.
图8. 电凝或Weck夹夹闭岩上窦。	Figure 8: The superior petrosal sinus is now coagulated or ligated with Weck clips.
为保证Labbé静脉等颞部主要静脉的回流，夹闭点需在其汇入横窦-乙状窦的前方。	The point where the sinus is divided must be anterior to the insertion point of the main temporal draining veins including the vein of Labbé to preserve their outflow into the transverse-sigmoid sinuses.
若Labbé静脉从暴露区域经过，可部分松解移动，使其远离操作区域。	If the vein of Labbé crosses the area of exposure, it can be partially untethered, mobilized, and protected away from the surgical corridor and retraction vector.
术前CTA/MRV评估颞叶静脉回流方式及小脑幕窦有助于判断切开小脑幕的安全区域。	Preoperative assessment of the temporal lobe’s venous drainage patterns and tentorial traversing veins using CT/catheter angiography or magnetic resonance (MR) venography is beneficial in tailoring the safe zones for tentorial transection.
若岩上窦与静脉回流区域位置紧密，沿小脑幕中份至岩上窦做切口可保留此窦，于窦周形成一个空间有限的至岩斜区的手术通道。	If the superior petrosal sinus is intimately involved with the venous drainage of the region, an incision along the tentorium medial to the superior petrosal sinus will spare this sinus and allow an operative corridor, albeit limited, toward the petroclival region around the sinus.
图9. 离断岩上窦后，平行于岩尖边缘朝向小脑幕切迹继续剪开硬膜。	Figure 9: After the superior petrosal sinus is divided, the dural incision is continued on the tentorium parallel to the edge of the petrous pyramid toward the tentorial incisura.
如果剪开硬膜的位置过于靠后则会形成小脑幕幕瓣阻碍手术通道。	Completing the dural incision more posteriorly will lead to a tentorial flap obstructing the surgical corridor.
此步操作需要注意牵开器及硬膜悬吊线的位置。	Note the location of the retractor blades and dural retention sutures.
图10. 在切断小脑幕内侧缘之前需要辨别滑车神经进入硬膜的位置。	Figure 10: Before the medial edge of the tentorium is transected, CN IV is identified to the point where it enters the dura.
为保护此神经，在其进入幕缘处之后切开小脑幕。	To protect the nerve, I cut the tentorium posterior to the location where the nerve enters the tentorial edge.
图11. 接下来使用牵开器抬起颞叶及后份小脑幕瓣，另一牵开器在后方牵开小脑。	Figure 11: Next, the posterior tentorial flap is elevated with the temporal lobe and held under a retractor blade. Another retractor blade holds the cerebellum in the posterior direction.
悬吊乙状窦前硬膜、颞侧硬膜及小脑幕。	The presigmoid dura, temporal dura, and tentorium are moblized using retention sutures.
为使暴露区域最大化，悬吊时缝线位置尽可能深及骨缘。	Note that the sutures are placed as deep as possible close to the bony edge to maximize the exposure.
图12.轻微后拉乙状窦，可见脑干腹外侧及岩斜区的颅神经根。	Figure 12: Gentle posterior retraction of the sigmoid sinus allows a direct panoramic view of the ventrolateral brainstem and the origin of cranial nerves along the petroclival space.
切除病变之后逐层关颅。	Following surgical treatment of the pathology at hand, closure begins.
最大程度的严密缝合硬膜，但“不透水”的方式严密缝合往往比较困难，需采取相关手段进一步防止术后脑脊液漏。	The dura is approximated primarily, but “watertight” closure is not feasible and additional measures minimize the risk of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
使用骨蜡严密封闭所有暴露的气房，在硬膜缺损处填补脂肪组织或筋膜密封漏孔。	All exposed air cells are meticulously waxed and strips of adipose tissue or fascia lata are placed through and over the dural defect to seal the fistula.
另外，暴露操作时取下的带血管蒂的骨膜瓣可用于封堵硬膜缺损。	Additionally, the vascularized periosteal flap that was harvested during exposure is used to cover and fill the defect in the dura.
钛钉钛板复位固定骨瓣，后续步骤按常规关颅。	The bone flap is replaced and secured using miniplates and the rest of closure is conducted in a standard fashion.
手术完成后持续腰穿引流48小时，引流量约8ml/h。	The lumbar drain is used to drain 8cc/hour of cerebrospinal fluid for 48 hours after surgery.
· 熟练掌握颞骨乳突的局部解剖对于顺利安全完成乙状窦前颞骨磨除至关重要。	An intimate familiarity with the anatomy of the temporal bone, including the mastoid process, is necessary for safe completion of presigmoid osteotomy.
· 恰当使用扩大经岩骨后入路的适应症可减少手术时间并降低相关手术风险。	Judicious use of extended posterior petrosal approach is prudent to avoid unnecessarily long operative sessions and the associated risks.
经髁入路	Transcondylar Approach
外侧枕下或者远外侧入路及其变体——经髁入路已经被发展用来显露颅颈交界区腹外侧和腹侧的病变。	The lateral suboccipital or far-lateral approach and its variant, the transcondylar approach, have been developed to expose pathologies at the ventral and ventrolateral craniovertebral junction.
这一区域包括位于脑干和脊髓前方，从颈静脉球向上颈段脊髓延伸的空间。	This region includes the space anterior to the brainstem and the spinal cord, extending from the jugular bulb to the upper cervical spine.
这一腹侧区域采用显微外科方法很难显露，而改良的外侧枕下入路要求不同程度的骨切除，最终腹侧病变不牵拉延髓和上段颈髓就能到达。	This ventral region is difficult to reach microsurgically, and modifications of the lateral suboccipital pathway require varying degrees of bony resection so that the pathology can be reached without retraction on the medulla oblongata and upper spinal cord.
前方入路比如经鼻内镜和经口手术主要用于处理硬膜外病变；而硬膜下病变更多选择外侧入路。	Anterior routes, such as the transnasal endoscopic and transoral trajectories, are reserved primarily for extradural lesions; the lateral corridors are preferred for intradural pathologies.
远外侧经髁入路要求乙状窦后的枕下开颅和C1半椎板切开术，以及同侧枕髁的部分或者完全切除术。	The far-lateral transcondylar approach entails a suboccipital craniotomy posterior to the sigmoid sinus and C1 hemilaminectomy followed by partial or complete resection of the ipsilateral occipital condyle.
笔者扩大切除枕髁仅仅到显露足够即可，因为过度的枕髁切除（大于30%）将增加寰枕失稳的风险并需要进行寰枕融合固定。	I extend the condylectomy only to the point of adequate exposure because excessive condylar resection (30%) increases the risk of occipitocervical instability and a need for occipitocervical fusion.
这一关节融合将极大的限制患者颈部的活动性。	This arthrodesis greatly limits the patient’s neck mobility.
除了远外侧经髁入路之外，极外侧经髁和经颈静脉球入路也用于处理这一区域广泛扩展的硬膜外病变。	In addition to the far-lateral transcondylar approach, extreme-lateral transcondylar and transjugular procedures have been described for extensive extradural lesions in this area.
这些入路包括完整的枕髁切术和部分乳突切除术，能够提供颅颈交界区前方的广泛显露。	These approaches involve a complete condylectomy and partial mastoidectomy, and they provide wide exposure of the anterior craniovertebral junction.
然而却有高致残和寰枕不稳风险，适应症很窄。	Yet they are associated with a high risk of surgical morbidity, require occipitocervical fusion, and have few if any indications.
因此，笔者仅仅描述远外侧经髁入路。	Therefore, I describe only the far-lateral transcondylar approach.
经髁入路的指证	Indications for Transcondylar Approach
颅颈交界区前方的硬膜下肿瘤，比如脑膜瘤或者后组颅神经神经鞘瘤。	Anterior craniocervical junction intradural tumors, such as meningiomas or lower cranial nerve schwannomas.
血管病变，比如椎动脉远侧的腹侧动脉瘤和下位脑干前方的海绵状血管瘤。	Vascular lesions, such as ventral aneurysms of the distal vertebral arteries and anterior lower brainstem cavernous malformations.
斜坡硬膜外病变，比如脊索瘤，软骨肉瘤，转移瘤或者颈静脉球瘤（前两种肿瘤最好的办法是经鼻内镜入路）。	Extradural clival lesions, such as chordomas, chondrosarcomas, metastases, or glomus jugulare tumors (the former two tumors are best approached through the transnasal endoscopic corridor).
图1：主体位于枕骨大孔腹侧的脑膜瘤采用如下所述的保守经髁切除（上图）。	Figure 1: This predominantly ventral foramen magnum meningioma was resected through the conservative condylectomy approach described below (upper images).
术后CT扫描显示（左下图）必须的最小程度的枕髁切除。	The postoperative computed tomography scan (left lower image) demonstrates the minimal extent of condylectomy necessary.
椎动脉在它进入硬膜时通过硬膜缝线牵向外侧。	The vertebral artery was mobilized laterally as it entered the dura via the dural retention sutures.
术中图片（右下图）显示至颅脊髓连接区前方硬膜的充分的显露和肿瘤切除后的结果。	The intraoperative photo (right lower image) shows the generous exposure toward the anterior dura at the craniospinal junction and the final resection result.
随着中枢神经轴外病变的减压创造了足够大的手术空间。	Extra-axial pathologies create ample amount of operative space upon their decompression.
MRI显示肿瘤的头尾侧范围并指导枕下开颅的大小。	Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrates the rostral-caudal extent of the tumor and guides the size of the suboccipital craniotomy.
另外，病变的腹外侧定位决定枕髁切除的必要程度。	In addition, the ventral-lateral location of the lesion dictates the necessary extent of condylectomy.
脑干及脊髓的水肿、肿瘤的钙化提示软膜侵犯；因为移除肿瘤必须进行一定程度的软膜操作，脑干及脊髓的水肿及肿瘤钙化也和术后神经功能下降的进展相关。	Brainstem and spinal cord edema and tumor calcification indicate pial invasion and correlate with development of postoperative neurologic decline since some degree of pial manipulation is necessary to mobilize the tumor.
对于这样的病例，笔者推荐进行次全切除——在软膜和血管周围留下一薄片肿瘤来保护软膜及穿支血管。	In these cases, a subtotal resection, while leaving a thin sheet of the tumor on the pia and surrounding vessels to protect the perforators, is recommended.
包裹血管和肿瘤侵犯进入颈静脉孔（包绕颅神经）也是次全切除的指证之一。	Encasement of vessels and infiltration of the tumor into the jugular foramen (encasement of cranial nerves) are other indications for subtotal resection.
图像评估还应包括CT或常规血管造影来判断肿瘤与毗邻血管（椎动脉，PICA的硬膜外或硬膜下起点）的关系以及椎动脉优势侧。	Imaging studies should include computed tomography (CT) or catheter angiography to evaluate the relationship of the adjacent vasculature (vertebral artery, intradural versus extradural origin of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery) to the pathology and the laterality of vertebral artery’s dominance.
这一信息用于判断同侧椎动脉在PICA起点以近阻断的安全性。	This information affects the safety of sacrificing the ipsilateral vertebral artery proximal to the posterior inferior cerebellar artery.
切除高度钙化的肿瘤也是令人生畏的挑战，因其包裹神经血管结构而仅要求行姑息性减压手术。	Highly calcified tumors can present daunting challenges in their resection and require decompressive surgery because they encase neurovascular structures.
图2. 一个脑膜瘤钙化的年轻患者，观察数年直到症状严重影响其日常生活（上图）。	Figure 2: This young patient’s calcified meningioma was observed for years until gait disturbance interfered with his daily life (upper images).
患者在外院首次尝试切除肿瘤以失败告终。	An initial attempt at its resection at an outside institution was futile.
来笔者院尝试再次手术。	Another attempt at resection was undertaken.
肿瘤高度钙化使减压十分棘手，最终采用磨钻磨除肿瘤核心部分。	The highly calcified nature of the tumor complicated tumor decompression that was accomplished via drilling the core of the tumor.
在从脑干表面移除肿瘤包膜时，笔者不小心损伤了被包裹的椎动脉。	During mobilization of the capsule away from the brainstem, I inadvertently injured the encased vertebral artery.
这一激进做法导致了术后脑干梗死，最终患者不幸死亡（下图）。	My aggressive approach led to postoperative brainstem strokes and the unfortunate demise of this patient (lower images).
这一病例告诫笔者枕骨大孔区高度钙化的肿瘤减压比积极切除更重要。	This case taught me the importance of decompression rather than aggressive resection in highly calcified foramen magnum tumors.
患者术前评估应该包括完整的神经病学检查和耳鼻喉科检查，特别是后组颅神经功能的评估。	The patient’s preoperative evaluation should include a thorough neurologic and otolaryngologic exam with particular attention to the lower cranial nerves.
必须仔细检查吞咽和声带功能。	Detailed evaluations of the swallowing and vocal cord functions are necessary.
如果患者术前发现后组颅神经麻痹，应该告知患者术后气管切开和胃造瘘的必要性。	If there is concern regarding preoperative lower cranial nerve palsy, the patient should be informed of the need for a tracheostomy and/or gastrostomy postoperatively.
术前吞咽功能障碍导致的营养不良患者应该首先给予营养支持来减少术后伤口裂开的风险。	Malnourished patients affected by preoperative swallowing dysfunction should be treated first through nutritional consultation to minimize the risk of postoperative wound breakdown,
在这些评估之后，术者依据CT和MRI的详细信息计划枕髁的切除范围。	After these evaluations, the surgeon plans the expected extent of condylar resection based on a detailed study of the MR and CT images.
笔者认为枕髁切除在30%以内足以安全切除所有腹侧病变。	I believe that removal of less than 30% of the condyle is all that is needed to safely resect all ventral lesions.
通常，到达脑干前方的必须的手术通道已经被肿瘤本身拓展变宽，更大范围的枕髁切除就没有必要了。	Almost always, the pathologic lesion itself has widened the required operative corridor toward the anterior brainstem and eliminates the need for more extensive condylar resection.
笔者不建议将椎动脉向内侧移位后进一步切除枕髁（极外侧入路）。	I do not advocate medial mobilization of the vertebral artery (extreme far lateral approach) to further the condylectomy.
事实上，这一操作没有必要，而且增加了损伤动脉和舌下神经的风险，并预示生物力学不稳。	In fact, this maneuver is unnecessary and increases the risk of injury to the artery and hypoglossal nerve and portends biomechanical instability.
推荐采用术中脑干听觉诱发电位、体感诱发电位和后组颅神经（VII、X、XI、XII)肌电监测。	Intraoperative monitoring of brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) and somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) as well as electromyographic monitoring of cranial nerves VII, X, XI, and XII are recommended.
Rhoton医生的详尽工作提供了大量精美图片，下列图片进一步说明本章后续的相关手术解剖。	The following images from Dr. Albert Rhoton’s work further illustrate the relevant surgical anatomy described later in this chapter.
详细理解颅颈交界区的复杂解剖对于避免并发症十分重要。	A detailed understanding of the complex anatomy of the craniocervical junction is important for complication avoidance.
图3：左上图斜线区定义了颅颈交界区单纯腹侧病变切除所必须的最大枕髁切除范围。	Figure 3: The hashed area in the left upper image defines the maximal required extent of condylectomy for purely ventral craniocervical lesions.
这一入路的第一步是在C1椎弓外侧（动脉沟）及早识别椎动脉。	Early identification of the vertebral artery on the lateral arch of C1 (sulcus arteriosus) is the first step in this approach.
注意髁后导静脉的定位是辅助判断枕髁切除范围的解剖标志（右上图）。	Note the location of the posterior condylar vein as a landmark to assist with the extent of condylectomy (right upper image).
髁静脉沿枕髁外侧走形。	The vein is along the lateral aspect of the condyle.
一旦到达髁静脉，笔者仅磨除枕髁皮质骨外壳。	Once I reach the vein, I drill only the outer shell of the condyle.
下图显示该区其他相关解剖包括舌下神经管（图片感谢Rhoton教授授权）。	The lower images demonstrate other relevant anatomy of the region including cranial nerve XII (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4：这些图片进一步详细描绘了颅颈交界区硬膜外和硬膜下解剖。	Figure 4: These images further detail the extra- and intradural anatomy at the craniovervical junction.
C2神经节位置很明确，牵拉或者切断会导致其分布区的麻木不适。	The location of the C2 ganglion is evident; its retraction or transection leads to dense numbness in its distribution.
注意舌下神经的定位（下图）。	Note the location of cranial nerve XII (left lower image).
切断齿状韧带拓展手术通道(图片感谢Rhoton教授授权)。	Dissection of dentate ligaments expands the operative corridor (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图5: 这些图片进一步展示颅颈交界区复杂的血管神经解剖关系。	Figure 5: These images further demonstrate the complex neurovascular relationships of the craniocervical region.
上图揭示完整的枕髁切除后右侧舌下神经的相关解剖。	The upper image indicates the relevant anatomy of the right hypoglossal nerve after a complete condylectomy.
注意椎动脉的肌支及其定位（下图）；肌支的撕脱会导致喷射性出血，但是这样的出血不应与主干出血相混淆。	Note the muscular branches of the vertebral artery and their location (lower image); their avulsion may lead to torrential bleeding, but this bleeding should not be confused with bleeding from the parent vessel.
C1神经根和副神经的上1-2个脊神经根可能会在显露大肿瘤时牺牲(图片感谢Rhoton教授授权)。	The C1 rootlets and 1 or 2 upper spinal rootlets of the accessory nerve may be sacrificed to expose large tumors (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图 6: 这一图片模拟手术视野和部分枕髁切除后的相关解剖。	Figure 6: This image simulates the operative perspective and related anatomy after a partial condylectomy has been executed.
硬膜已经被移除。	The dura has been removed.
可以获得一个达到颅颈交界区腹侧硬膜的合理通道。	A reasonable pathway toward the ventral dura near the craniocervical junction is available.
位于这一区域的肿瘤会推移血管神经结构并拓展手术通道(图片感谢Rhoton教授授权）。	Tumors in this region displace the neurovascular structures and expand the operative corridor (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
经髁骨质切除	TRANSCONDYLAR OSTEOTOMY
采用这一手术入路时，体位和头部旋转角度能明显影响手术角度与空间。	Patient positioning and the degree of head rotation can substantially affect the operative corridor during this approach.
图7： 患者采用公园长椅位或侧卧位。	Figure 7: The patient is placed in the park-bench or lateral position.
肩垫支撑对侧腋部。	An axillary roll supports the contralateral axilla.
同侧肩部轻轻向前下牵拉并用胶带固定。	The ipsilateral shoulder is gently pulled anteriorly and inferiorly and secured with tape.
用软垫保护所有受压点，患者被固定在手术床上并用布带固定髋部和下肢，确保在手术阶段能安全的旋转手术床。	All pressure points are well padded and the patient is secured and taped to the table at the hip and lower extremities to allow safe tilting of the table during the later stages of the operation.
固定带应该远离腓骨头避免损伤腓总神经。	The tape should be away from the head of the fibula to avoid common peroneal nerve neuropathy.
下图显示头部旋转角度。	The degree of head rotation is illustrated in the lower sketch.
乳突位于头部最高点。	The mastoid bone is the highest point on the head.
笔者会避免明显的颈部旋转，但是从颈枕交界区手术角度来讲，将患者头部向地板轻度旋转能维持椎动脉相对正常的解剖走行。	I avoid significant neck rotation, but slightly turn the patient’s head toward the floor to maintain the relative normal anatomic course of the vertebral artery at the craniocervical junction for surgical orientation.
关于切口有很多种不同的描述，包括“S”和“U”形等。	A number of different incisions, including the “lazy S” and “reserve U” incisions, have been described for transcondylar route.
笔者采用传统的“曲棍球棒”切口，它对颈部肌肉损伤最小，同时能将肌皮瓣向外侧移位远离手术区域。	I use the traditional hockey-stick incision because it minimizes dissection though the neck muscles and mobilizes the myocutaneous flap laterally out of my working zone.
图8：笔者采用“曲棍球棒”手术切口，从乳突上约3cm开始向上延伸，然后恰好在上项线下方弧形向内弯曲，到达中线后向下延伸至C2-3棘突水平。	Figure 8: I use a “hockey-stick” incision beginning about 3 cm above the mastoid tip and extending superiorly, then curving medially just below the superior nuchal line to the midline, where it extends inferiorly to the level of the C2-3 spinous processes.
接着，在平行于上项线下方略深一点切开，留下1cm的肌肉条有利于最后的缝合。	Next, a deeper cut is made below and parallel to the superior nuchal line to leave a 1-cm cuff of muscle that will facilitate closure.
识别项白线后将脊旁肌肉从这一无血管组织平面上分离。	The midline nuchal ligament is identified and the paraspinal muscles are divided within this avascular plane.
枕骨和C1/C2椎板上的肌肉从骨膜下平面分离，然后将肌皮瓣翻向下外侧。	The muscles overlying the occipital bone and C1/C2 laminae are mobilized in the subperiosteal plane, and the myocutaneous flap is reflected inferolaterally.
一旦肌皮瓣被移向外侧，应该在C1椎弓上椎动脉沟内极其小心地识别椎动脉并避免损伤。	Once the myocutaneous flap is mobilized laterally, great care must be taken to identify the vertebral artery in its sulcus over the lateral arch of C1 and avoid its injury.
当骨膜下分离到达C1椎板外侧半时，放弃电凝而采用仔细的锐性和钝性分离相结合的方式识别椎动脉和包绕动脉的椎静脉丛。	Once subperiosteal dissection reaches the lateral half of the C1 lamina, electrocautery is abandoned in favor of meticulous sharp and blunt dissection to identify the artery and its encasing venous plexus.
图9：当椎动脉出C1横突孔时，它转向内侧并位于C1上表面的骨压迹内（动脉沟）。	Figure 9: As the vertebral artery emerges from the transverse foramen of C1, it turns medially and rests on a bony depression on the superior surface of C1 called the sulcus arteriosus.
椎动脉水平走行直到它在C1侧块内侧缘穿经寰枕筋膜，并在此处开始移行为硬膜内段。	The artery proceeds in a horizontal course until it pierces the atlanto-occipital membrane just medial to the edge of the C1 lateral mass, where it becomes intradural.
在再次手术的病例中可用采用多普勒超声在瘢痕内识别椎动脉走行。	Doppler ultrasonography may be used during repeat operations to identify the artery within the scar.
更有甚者，老年患者高度扩张的椎动脉可能不位于椎动脉沟内而走行至椎旁肌肉内，此时必须小心分离肌肉。	Moreover, in older patients, highly ectatic vertebral arteries may reside within the paraspinal muscles, outside the sulcus arteriosus, and careful muscle dissection is warranted.
图示右侧椎动脉被椎静脉丛包绕。	The right vertebral artery encased by its venous plexus is shown.
肌皮瓣随后被鱼钩固定，笔者采用精细刮匙从枕骨大孔缘和C1半椎板分离寰枕韧带。	The myocutaneous flap is then secured with fishhooks, and I use a fine curette to dissect the atlanto-occipital ligament away from the edge of the foramen magnum and the hemilamina of C1.
然后沿椎动脉分离至横突孔。	The vertebral artery is then followed into the transverse foramen.
采用骨膜下分离技术显露寰椎后弓和侧块。	The posterior arch of the atlas and its lateral mass are also exposed in a subperiosteal fashion.
采用显微外科技术分离椎动脉周围的韧带，这样，在翻起硬膜时可将椎动脉向外侧移位。	The ligaments around the artery are microsurgically dissected so that the artery can be mobilized laterally during reflection of the dura.
椎动脉周围静脉丛出血可采用低电流双极电凝或者凝血酶浸润的明胶海绵填塞和压迫来控制。	Venous bleeding from the periarterial plexus can be controlled using low-amplitude bipolar coagulation or thrombin-soaked Gelfoam packing and tamponade.
图10. 接下来进行外侧枕下颅骨切除/骨窗和C1半椎板切开术。	Figure 10: Next, the lateral suboccipital craniectomy or craniotomy and C1 hemilaminectomy are performed.
可以用铣刀开颅，但是铣刀护板很难通过枕骨大孔唇部增厚的骨质。	A craniotome may be used, but it is often difficult to maneuver the footplate through the thickened bone at the lip of the foramen magnum.
因为这一原因，笔者采用颅骨切除术。	For this reason, I perform a craniectomy.
也可采用磨钻去除C1同侧半椎板皮质骨，然后用Kerrison咬骨钳完成半椎板切除术。	The drill is also used to shell out the ipsilateral half of the C1 lamina; a Kerrison rongeur is then utilized to complete the hemilaminectomy.
图11. 一旦完成了颅骨切除和半椎板切除，笔者采用磨钻和咬骨钳相结合的方式进一步切除需要切除的骨质，	Figure 11: Once the bone flap is removed and the hemilaminectomy completed, I excise additional bone using a combination of the drill and Kerrison rongeurs.
典型的骨质显露范围根据肿瘤的准确定位从中线附近延伸到枕髁内侧部分。	The bony exposure typically extends from near the midline to the medial aspect of the occipital condyle, depending on the exact position of the tumor.
外侧枕下颅骨切除显露从乙状窦一直到颈静脉球的后方；	Lateral suboccipital craniectomy exposes the posterior aspect of the sigmoid sinus leading to the jugular bulb.
半椎板切开延伸到C1侧块水平。	The hemilaminectomy extends to the level of the C1 lateral mass.
图12：笔者通过切除外侧枕下骨质并最小化磨除枕髁来增加显露（上二图）。	Figure 12: I resect the lateral suboccipital bone and minimally drill through the occipital condyle to accentuate the exposure (upper two images).
靠近枕髁外侧通常有一个导静脉，这是一个有用的解剖标志。	There is often an emissary vein near the lateral aspect of the condyle that is a useful landmark.
这一板障内静脉会导致相当程度的出血，但是用骨蜡或者明教海绵填塞能比较容易控制。	This intradiploic vein can cause a fair amount of bleeding, but the bleeding is easily controlled with bone wax or Gelfoam packing.
笔者沿着髁后导静脉进一步去除枕骨大孔缘并磨除枕髁后方的皮质骨。	I continue to remove the rim of foramen magnum and follow the posterior condylar vein while drilling the posterior cortex of the condyle.
这一操作足以提供合适的到达脑干腹侧的手术通道（下图，箭头指示枕髁切除范围恰好终止于椎动脉入硬膜处的上外侧）。	This maneuver is adequate for providing a reasonable operative corridor toward the ventral brainstem (lower image, arrow points at the extent of condylectomy that ends just supralateral to the dural entry point of the vertebral artery).
本质上来说，移除枕髁后内侧30%或以内的骨质通常满足到达颅颈交界区前方的需要。	Essentially, removal of about 30% or less of the posteromedial condyle is usually all that is needed to reach the anterior craniocervical junction.
C1侧块关节突上方切除至恰位于椎动脉入硬膜处外侧。	The superior articular process of the C1 lateral mass is resected just lateral to the dural entry point of the vertebral artery.
如果绝对需要更广泛的枕髁切除，外科医生必须阻止舌下神经在其通过枕髁前1/3上部时被损伤。	If a more extensive condylectomy is absolutely necessary, the surgeon must prevent injury to the hypoglossal nerve as it courses through the superior aspect of the anterior third of the condyle.
C1侧块关节突上部也有可能需要部分切除。	The superior articular process of the C1 lateral mass may also be partially removed.
枕髁切除一半或以上时会导致生物力学不稳而需要枕颈融合。	Resection of half or more of the occipital condyle results in biomechanical instability and necessitates occipitocervical arthrodesis.
图13. 硬膜弧形剪开。	Figure 13: The dura is incised in a curvilinear fashion.
剪开硬膜时小心避免损伤硬膜下血管神经结构，特别是硬膜下椎动脉及其分支，也包括可能被向后推移的脊副神经。	Care is taken during dural incision to avoid intradural neurovascular structures, particularly the intradural vertebral artery and its branches, as well as a potentially posteriorly displaced spinal accessory nerve.
肿瘤通常向外侧推移椎动脉颅内段近端。	The tumor usually displaces the proximal intradural segment of the vertebral artery laterally.
图14. 术中图片显示通过最小的枕髁切除充分显露右前外侧的枕大孔区脑膜瘤（上图）。	Figure 14: Intraoperative images demonstrate the generous exposure of a right anterolateral foramen magnum meningioma (upper image) through a minimal condylectomy.
C1神经根和副神经的上1-2个脊神经根（上图-位于剪刀头端）可能会在显露这样的大肿瘤时被切断。	The C1 rootlets and 1 or 2 upper spinal rootlets of the accessory nerve (upper image–at the tip of the scissors) may be sacrificed to expose this large tumor.
沿肿瘤包膜后极向外侧移动副神经。	The accessory nerve is then mobilized laterally along the posterior capsule of the tumor.
最后的切除结果也被展示（下图）。	The final resection result is also shown (lower image).
在下图中你可以看见，这种有限枕髁切除理念的经髁入路足以到达颅颈交界区腹侧。	As you can see in the lower image, this minimalistic approach to condylectomy allows adequate access to the ventral craniospinal junction.
硬膜边缘用4-0缝线牵拉，并且术中应保持湿润，避免因显微镜灯光的高热而脱水；这有利于术后不透水缝合。	The dural edges are tacked up using 4-0 sutures and kept moist throughout the operation to avoid their desiccation by the intense heat of the microscope, facilitating watertight closure.
缝线牵拉的针脚应沿骨缘分布（显露硬膜的最前方）来保证硬膜瓣最大程度远离手术视角。	The tack-up stiches are placed along the bony edges (the most anterior aspect of the exposed dura) to maximize mobilization of the dural flaps away from the operative trajectory.
这一操作在椎动脉入硬膜处将其向外侧移位并远离术者的工作角度。	This maneuver mobilizes the vertebral artery as it enters the dura, laterally and out of the working trajectory of the surgeon.
枕大池可能需要打开释放脑脊液，松弛小脑，这样不需要固定牵开器就可改善显露。	The cisterna magna may be opened to drain cerebrospinal fluid, relax the cerebellum, and improve exposure without the use of fixed retraction.
此时即可开始处理病变。	At this point, the relevant pathology is addressed.
用显微外科技术切除病变后，术野彻底止血后开始关注如何关颅。	Once the pathology is surgically treated, absolute hemostasis is achieved in the operative site and the surgeon’s attention turns to closure.
仔细冲洗干净蛛网膜下腔后，最重要的就是缝合硬膜，必须尽一切可能达到不透水缝合，需要时还可以采用硬膜补片。	The subarachnoid space is copiously irrigated, and the dura is closed primarily, if possible, or via a dural graft. Every effort must be made to achieve a watertight closure.
因为骨质缺损小，所以笔者并不常规将骨瓣还纳或者颅骨成形。	I do not routinely replace the bone flap or complete a cranioplasty because the bony defect is small.
在颅颈交界区采用上述手术入路后不用担心迟发的颅颈不稳。	There is no concern regarding delayed instability in the craniospinal junction after the above approach.
随后将软组织解剖复位缝合。	The soft tissues are then closed in the anatomic layers.
部分枕髁切除 (30%)足以获得脑干前方充分的显露。	A partial condylectomy (30%) suffices to achieve adequate exposure of the anterior aspect of the brainstem.
在笔者看来，没有必要进行更大程度的枕髁切除或者椎动脉的内侧移位 。	In my opinion, a more extensive condylectomy or medial mobilization of the vertebral artery is unnecessary.
术前应该评估椎动脉优势侧并排除同侧椎动脉终止于PICA的可能性。	Preoperative studies should evaluate vertebral dominance and exclude the possibility of the ipsilateral vertebral artery ending only in the posterior inferior cerebellar artery.
应关注冗长扩张的椎动脉的任何异常（如在动脉沟之外和隐藏在颈后肌肉内）。	Any aberrant location of the dolichoectatic vertebral artery extending outside its sulcus arteriosus and hiding within the posterior muscle layers should be noted.
在这样变异的病例中，分离过程极易损伤椎动脉。	In this variation, the artery is vulnerable to injury during dissection.
椎动脉肌肉分支将椎动脉和后方软组织连接在一起；这些分支应该小心电凝后切断。	Muscular branches of the vertebral artery tether the artery to the posterior soft tissues; these branches should be carefully coagulated and transected.
这些肌肉分支的撕脱伤可能导致主干血管闭塞。	Their avulsion injury may lead to parent vessel occlusion.
因椎动脉沟后壁可能并不完整，为了保护椎动脉，笔者避免在C1椎板外侧半使用单极电凝。	To protect the vertebral artery, I avoid monopolar electrocautery on the lateral half of the C1 lamina as the posterior wall of the sulcus arteriosus may be incompetent.
应该避免过度电凝椎静脉丛。	Aggressive coagulation of the vertebral venous plexus should be avoided to prevent arterial injury.
凝血酶浸润的明胶海绵可用于止血。	Thrombin-soaked Gelfoam may be used to achieve hemostasis.
鞍结节脑膜瘤	Tuberculum Sella Meningioma
图1:大约在1913年，harvey cushing给这位最有可能是罹患蝶骨嵴内侧型或者鞍结节脑膜瘤的患者做了尸检（照片由耶鲁大学cushing脑肿瘤登记中心授权）。	Figure 1: Harvey Cushing conducted the autopsy of one of his patients who had suffered most likely from a tuberculum sella or medial sphenoid wing meningioma (circa ~1913)(Image courtesy of the Cushing Brain Tumor Registry at Yale University).
本章着重讨论鞍结节脑膜瘤（TSMs）的开颅技术要点，若想了解相关内镜经鼻入路的内容请参阅《内镜入路切除鞍旁脑膜瘤》一章。	This chapter reviews the techniques for transcranial resection of tuberculum sella meningiomas (TSMs). For details regarding endoscopic transnasal removal of these tumors, please refer to the chapter on Endoscopic Parasellar Meningioma Resection.
鞍结节脑膜瘤约占所有颅内脑膜瘤的5-10%，起源于鞍结节的硬膜，尤其是视神经管和视交叉沟外部的交界处（最常见的起源部位）。视交叉沟、鞍膈和蝶棱都位于肿瘤的发生区域。	The TSMs comprise approximately 5% to 10% of all intracranial meningiomas and arise from the dura of the tuberculum sellae. This region includes the chiasmatic sulcus, limbus sphenoidale, and diaphragma sellae. The most common point of origin of these tumors is the junction of the optic canal and lateral aspect of the chiasmatic sulcus.
鞍结节脑膜瘤的起源部位与嗅沟脑膜瘤非常靠近，但是两者的临床表现和影像学特征区别显著，因此术前注意事项不尽相同。	These tumors are anatomically closely related to the origin of olfactory groove meningiomas; however, TSMs differ from olfactory groove meningiomas in their clinical and radiologic presentation and thus demand different surgical considerations.
其中非常重要的一个鉴别点就是鞍结节脑膜瘤起源于视交叉下方，肿瘤长大后会往上、往外侧推移视神经，而嗅沟脑膜瘤一般是将视器压向后方。	In particular, since TSMs originate in the subchiasmatic region, they elevate the optic chiasm and laterally displace the optic nerves as they enlarge, as opposed to olfactory groove meningiomas, which typically depress the optic apparatus posteriorly.
此外，绝大多数鞍结节脑膜瘤会侵犯单侧或者双侧的视神经管，术中必须减压骨管并移除里面的肿瘤。	Furthermore, the majority of TSMs show involvement of one or both optic canals, necessitating bony decompression and tumor removal of the intracanalicular tumor components.
而且大型肿瘤还有可能对垂体柄、下丘脑和三脑室产生占位效应，造成激素紊乱和脑积水。	Larger tumors may exert mass effect on the pituitary stalk, hypothalamus, and third ventricle, causing hormone dysregulation and hydrocephalus.
鞍结节脑膜瘤也可以将颈内动脉推向外侧，偶然情况下还会与前交通复合体和其穿支动脉具有紧密粘连或者包裹的关系。	The TSMs can also displace the carotid arteries laterally, and occasionally densely adhere to or encase the anterior communicating artery complex and its associated perforators.
此外，骨质增生、肿瘤质地坚韧富有弹性也非少见，	Hyperostosis of the underlying bone, and their firm, rubbery texture is not uncommon.
而且肿瘤还可以长进鞍内或者侵犯下方的蝶窦或筛窦。	They can also grow posteriorly into the sella, or erode inferiorly into the sphenoid or ethmoid sinuses.
鞍结节脑膜瘤属于鞍上、视交叉下的中线部位病变，生长过程非常隐袭，因此患者经常是在出现显著的视交叉压迫症状之后才得以诊断，而这时肿瘤已经具有相当体积了。	The TSMs are traditionally found above the sella, below the chiasm, and in the midline. Growth of these lesions is quite insidious, and as such, they are often diagnosed at advanced stages of growth in patients with significant symptomatic chiasmal compression.
患者主要的临床症状是视器受压所导致的视觉障碍，病程通常持续很多年，可以表现为单侧损害，但双侧受累更为常见。	Compression of the optic apparatus with subsequent visual dysfunction is a common finding in patients with these lesions. The pattern of vision loss can be unilateral, or more commonly bilateral, and often progresses over years.
大部分患者存在视力下降，许多患者还会有视神经萎缩。	Most patients experience decreased visual acuity and many suffer from optic atrophy.
鉴别诊断包括嗅沟、床突和蝶骨嵴内侧的病变，比如颅咽管瘤、转移瘤和视神经胶质瘤。鞍结节脑膜瘤也可以类似于异位的泌乳素瘤和其他类型垂体腺瘤，但是一般不伴有蝶鞍扩大。	As opposed to pituitary adenomas, the sellae turcica is usually not expanded. Differential diagnosis for these lesions includes tumors of the olfactory groove, clinoid process, and medial sphenoid wing, such as craniopharyngiomas, metastasis, and optic gliomas. Unusually placed prolactinomas and other pituitary adenomas can mimic TSMs.
外科医师应该全面掌握患者的病史资料并进行详尽的体查，包括视野检查。	A thorough history and physical examination, as well as a visual field exam, should be performed.
前面已经提及，视觉损害可以只累及单侧，但更常是双侧，表现出视交叉综合征（视交叉受压向后上方导致的双颞侧视野缺损）或者视野盲点扩大。	The visual deficit, as mentioned, may be unilateral, but is more commonly bilateral, manifested as chiasmal syndrome (bitemporal hemianopsia due to superior and posterior displacement of the optic chiasm) or an enlarged blind spot.
患者往往存在头痛症状，大型肿瘤者还会因为占位效应和水肿导致额叶和下丘脑功能障碍最终出现精神失常，具体表现为下列几种的任何组合：行为或性格改变、原动力缺乏、淡漠、近事遗忘、抑郁、冲动和困惑。	Patients often complain of headaches.  Patients with larger tumors may present with mental status changes as a result of frontal lobe and hypothalamic dysfunction induced by tumor mass effect and edema. These mental status changes may include any combination of the following: behavioral or personality changes, loss of motivation, apathy, short-term memory loss, depression, impulsivity, and confusion.
患者也有可能存在恶心／呕吐症状，这是由梗阻性脑积水所致，或者存在激素紊乱的症状和体征，这是肿瘤对下丘脑和垂体柄的占位效应所致。	Patients may also present with nausea/vomiting, indicative of obstructive hydrocephalus, or with signs and symptoms of pituitary hormone dysregulation, due to mass effect on the hypothalamus or pituitary stalk.
如果肿瘤累及鞍内和垂体，还应该进行内分泌方面的检查。	An endocrinology work-up should be considered if there is intrasellar and pituitary gland involvement.
个别泌乳素瘤的影像学表现类似于鞍结节脑膜瘤，术前应该仔细鉴别以免实施了不必要的外科干预。	A prolactinoma may rarely present radiographically as a TSM, and should be recognized preoperatively to prevent unnecessary operative intervention.
具体鉴别要点见《垂体腺瘤：诊断和手术注意事项》一章。	Please see the chapter for Pituitary Adenoma: Diagnosis and Operative Considerations for further discussion regarding diagnostic pitfalls.
增强mri等影像学检查有助于判断肿瘤的边界、与视器的关系、水肿范围和血管包绕情况。	Imaging studies include enhanced magnetic resonance (MR) sequences to clearly delineate the tumor margins, relationship to the optic apparatus, and the extent of surrounding edema and vascular encasement.
肿瘤一般朝向后上方的视器生长，并且常常侵犯单侧或双侧视神经管的内侧部，这时高分辨率的抑脂相冠状位增强序列是最好的诊断工具。	Growth is generally in the superior and posterior direction toward the optic apparatus, and often there is extension down the medial aspect of one or both optic canals, best identified with fat-suppression high-resolution coronal enhanced sequences.
额底后部存在明显的脑膜尾征。	Dural tails along the posterior basal frontal dura are evident.
评价肿瘤与血管的关系时，比如累及大脑前动脉的大型肿瘤，mra更具可靠性。	MR angiography more reliably assesses the tumor’s relationship to the vasculature, such as with large tumors involving the anterior cerebral vessels.
但是多数情况下，t2序列就已经足够了。	However, I often find T2 sequences adequate for disclosure of this relationship.
ct则可以观察骨质增生、破坏的范围和前床突的气化程度，这些都有助于预判术毕时是否需要进行颅底重建。	Computed tomography (CT) scan can determine the extent of hyperostosis, bony invasion and pneumatization of the anterior clinoid processes. The presence of any of these radiologic findings may necessitate planning for skull base reconstruction after resection.
鞍结节脑膜瘤的血供主要来源于眼动脉的筛后分支和软脑膜血管，dsa检查的意义很小。	Digital subtraction angiography has little role in evaluation of TSMs because the tumor’s blood supply is largely from the posterior ethmoidal branches of the ophthalmic arteries and pial blood vessels.
但是术前栓塞有视觉损害的风险，一旦出现将令人无法接受。	Therefore, preoperative embolization risks visual impairment and is generally not attempted.
图2:这例典型的鞍结节脑膜瘤体积大并且挤压、包绕血管，因此最适合经颅切除，而不是经鼻。	Figure 2: This classic large TSM is best suited for a transcranial approach rather than an endoscopic transnasal route due to its large size, expanse and significant encasement of the vasculature.
肿瘤的影像学表现也非常具有特征性：鞍内不扩大（左上图）和额底可见脑膜尾征（右下图）。	Note the lack of sellar enlargement (left upper image) and presence of a dural tail (right upper image) as distinguishing features of the tumor.
下图提示病变已经累及双侧视神经管，而且以右侧为甚。	The tumor had infiltrated into bilateral optic canals with the right canal more affected than the left (lower image).
红色箭头指的是视管内强化的肿瘤，黄色箭头则是指被移位的视神经。	The red arrow points at the intracanalicular enhancing tumor while the yellow arrow indicates the displaced optic nerve.
鞍结节脑膜瘤（TSMs）的处理方案包括观察、显微手术切除和／或立体定向放射外科治疗。	Management options for TSMs include observation, microsurgical resection, and/or stereotactic radiosurgery.
患者往往是在肿瘤侵犯视器造成视觉损害后才得以诊断，此时必须解除病变的占位效应，因此放射外科治疗或观察就显得不太合适，所以对于症状性患者最好采取显微外科切除的措施。	Microsurgical resection is typically the best treatment option for symptomatic TSMs. Diagnosis of these lesions usually occurs during an evaluation for vision impairment. The tumor’s involvement with the optic apparatus at the time of diagnosis necessitates relieving the associated mass effect, and eliminates radiosurgery or observation as viable treatment options.
意外发现的小型TSMs若不伴有明显的视交叉受压和视觉障碍时可以考虑观察，定期复查MRI以及测试视野。	Small incidental TSMs without significant mass effect on the optic chiasm in patients with preserved vision may be observed with serial MRIs and visual field testing.
视器对放射暴露的敏感性很高，因此即使是肿瘤体积小也不适合立体定向放射外科治疗。	However, stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) is not a good option, even in patients with small lesions, due to the radiosensitivity of the adjacent optic apparatus.
如果症状性患者伴有明显的瘤周水肿，围手术期应该使用激素消肿。	If imaging of symptomatic lesions reveals significant peritumoral cerebral edema, steroids are administered temporarily perioperatively.
术前阅片时尤其要留意骨质增生、筛窦或蝶窦破坏和前床突气化的情况，这些都有助于预判术毕时是否需要重建颅底以免脑脊液漏。	During review of the preoperative imaging, particular attention should be directed to evidence of hyperostosis underlying the lesion, erosion of the ethmoid or sphenoid sinuses, or a pneumatized anterior clinoid. These factors should be considered when determining whether skull base reconstruction will be required to minimize the risk of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
MRI的高分辨率抑脂序列能够显示肿瘤对双侧视神经管内侧部的侵犯程度。	High-resolution sequences of the MR images with fat suppression techniques identify tumor extension into the medial aspects of both optic canals.
尽管这些特殊检查有一定的作用，但是针对每例患者，术者在术中都应该仔细探查视神经管并彻底移除管内的肿瘤。	Although these special sequences are helpful, all patients should undergo careful inspection of their optic canals intraoperatively to definitively exclude compressive intraforaminal tumor fragments.
术前预防性应用抗癫痫药物，若患者术前存在癫痫症状，术后继续服用半年到一年，否则术后一周便可停药。	Preoperative use of seizure prophylaxis is indicated and continued for 7 days postoperatively. If the patient presented with seizures, anticonvulsants are continued for 6 months to a year. In the absence of seizure activity, the medication may be weaned off on the 7th postoperative day.
进行腰大池引流以利于手术早期降低颅内压和打开硬膜之前实施硬膜外前床突切除术。	A lumbar drain is installed to provide early CSF decompression and facilitate extradural clinoidectomy before dural opening.
鞍结节的外侧界为床突，下界为垂体柄、Liliequist膜和漏斗，上界为视交叉、终板和大脑前动脉。	The borders of the tuberculum sellae include the clinoid processes laterally, the pituitary stalk, Liliequist membrane, and infundibulum inferiorly, and the optic chiasm, lamina terminalis, and anterior cerebral arteries superiorly.
鞍结节脑膜瘤一般往前爬行至蝶骨平台，往外侧包绕视神经和视管，并往上推挤、越过视交叉。	Tumors of this type generally extend anteriorly over the planum sphenoidale, laterally around the optic nerves and canal, and above the chiasm.
鞍膈连接鞍结节和后床突上缘，平均长8mm、宽11mm。	The diaphragm sellae stretches from the tuberculum sellae to the upper border of the posterior clinoid processes, with an average length of 8 mm and width of 11 mm.
肿瘤进一步生长则会侵犯颈内动脉、终板和脚间池等重要的临近结构。	With their continued growth, these tumors involve important adjacent structures, including the carotid arteries, lamina terminalis, and the interpeduncular cisterns.
TSMs的血供主要来源于筛后动脉、眼动脉、垂体上动脉和前交通动脉。	Vascular supply to TSMs tends to derive from perforating branches of the posterior ethmoidal, ophthalmic, superior hypophyseal, and anterior communicating arteries (ACA).
图3:鞍结节脑膜瘤（TSMs）切除术相关的局部解剖（上图）。	Figure 3: The regional anatomy pertaining to the resection of the TSMs is shown (upper image).
红色箭头所指是TSMs的经典起源部位，棕色箭头指示肿瘤最常侵犯视神经管的位置，也就是视神经的内侧，这同时也是术野的盲区。	The red arrows point to the typical location for the origin of TSMs. The brown arrow demonstrates the common location, medial to the nerve and within the operator’s blind sport, where the tumor infiltrates the optic canal.
图中还可以看到动眼神经（黄色箭头）毗邻前床突的切除区域。	The vicinity of the oculomotor nerve (yellow arrow) to the area of clinoidectomy is indicated.
下图以冠状位展示鞍结节与周围血管的解剖关系。	A coronal view of the tuberculum sella and its anatomic relationships to the surrounding cerebrovascular structures are also demonstrated (lower image).
术中如果牺牲这些起自颈内动脉内侧壁并供应视交叉的小穿支将导致术后视力恶化甚至丧失。	The small perforating vessels arising from the medial wall of the carotid artery supply the chiasm; their sacrifice can lead to postoperative visual deterioration or loss.
经颅入路切除鞍结节脑膜瘤	RESECTION OF A TUBERCULUM SELLA MENINGIOMA THROUGH THE TRANSCRANIAL ROUTE
内镜经鼻入路尤其适合3cm以下的中小型TSMs，但是当肿瘤体积更大或者呈分叶状时，推荐采用扩大翼点入路，而双额入路完全没有必要，应尽量少用。	For small to medium sized TSMs (less than 3cm), I prefer the endoscopic transnasal route. However, for larger and multicompartmental lesions, I advocate the extended pterional approach. The bifrontal approach is unnecessary and avoidable.
经颅入路适合切除延伸至视神经外侧的肿瘤，或者当肿瘤包裹颈内动脉和长出其外侧界时。	Extension of the tumor lateral to the optic nerves indicates the need for a transcranial reach to effectively remove the tumor. Significant growth lateral to the carotid arteries and their encasement is another reason to consider the subfrontal corridor.
与双额入路相比，单侧额颞入路为广大神经外科医师所熟识、能够在手术早期识别视神经和颈内动脉，而且不需要开放额窦、牵拉双侧额叶和结扎矢状窦。	The advantages of a unilateral frontotemporal craniotomy over a bifrontal route include identification of the optic nerve and carotid artery early in surgery and avoidance of frontal air sinuses and bilateral frontal lobe retraction. In addition, this corridor preserves the sagittal sinus and is familiar to neurosurgeons.
其他的手术入路也包括眶颧入路、额外侧入路和眶上锁孔入路。	Other surgical approaches have been advocated for resection of TSMs, including the orbitozygomatic, lateral subfrontal, and supraorbital keyhole corridors.
笔者常规采用翼点入路切除大型TSMs。	Since I usually use the transcranial route for large lesions, I use the pterional corridor.
但是，眉弓切口眶上锁孔入路同样适合中小型TSMs，尽管针对此类肿瘤笔者倾向采用内镜经鼻入路。	However, the supraorbital craniotomy via an eye-brow incision is reasonable for small to medium size lesions that I prefer to reach through the endoscopic transnasal pathway.
TSMs属于中线部位的肿瘤，建议从视神经受累最严重的一侧开颅。	I approach this primarily midline tumor from the side of the more affected optic nerve.
术中对术侧视神经的骚扰更多。	The ipsilateral nerve is more prone to surgical manipulation.
TSMs沿着视神经内侧这个潜在的间隙侵入视神经管，因此很容易通过对侧来移除这部分肿瘤。	The contralateral nerve is readily decompressed via removal of the intracanalicular portion of the tumor that primarily enters the optic foramen along the potential space within the medial aspect of the nerve.
甚至是术前已经完全失明的患者，术后视力依然可能会有不同程度的恢复，所以即使术前视神经已经没有功能也不能将其切断。	Nonfunctioning nerves are not sacrificed because some recovery of vision, even after complete blindness, has been reported.
经鼻入路与经颅入路对比	Transnasal versus Transcranial Approach
大部分TSMs只侵犯视神经管的内侧部使得内镜经鼻提供的内侧入路优于经颅提供的外侧入路。	Most TSMs grow within the medial aspect of the optic canals, making an endonasal endoscopic resection more desirable than the lateral operative trajectory afforded through the transcranial routes.
不同角度的内镜能够观察到视交叉下间隙外侧的所有角落，而带蒂的鼻中隔粘膜瓣足以修补大型颅底缺损。	The use of angled endoscopes improves adequate visualization around the corners along the lateral infrachiasmatic space, and vascularized nasoseptal flaps facilitate reconstruction of large cranial base defects.
个别TSMs会长到视神经外侧，这时经鼻便不合适，而是应该选择翼点入路或者经眉弓眶上锁孔入路。	Occasionally the tumor extends lateral to the optic nerve, an area inaccessible to the endonasal approach. Tumors in this location are candidates for pterional and supraorbital eye-brow keyhole approaches.
同时也要考虑到视交叉与肿瘤的关系。对于受压上抬的前置型视交叉病例，经鼻入路比经颅入路拥有更灵活的操作角度。	The location of the chiasm in relation to the tumor is another consideration, with a superiorly displaced prefixed chiasm allowing more flexible operative working angles through the endonasal rather than transcranial approach.
最后，一般认为颈内动脉和大脑前动脉等血管受累严重时禁忌行经鼻入路。	Lastly, significant vascular involvement of the internal carotid and anterior cerebral arteries has traditionally contraindicated the application of the endonasal approach.
明显往上方生长的巨大型肿瘤采用眶颧入路进行切除则更有优势。	For giant tumors with significant superior extension, an orbitozygomatic craniotomy can be advantageous
笔者偏好通过内镜经鼻入路处理大部分的TSMs。	I prefer the endoscopic transnasal route for resection of most TSMs.
基于笔者的个人经验，大至3cm、软脑膜界面破坏（由脑水肿证实）和轻微到中等程度的血管包绕并不能被考虑为经鼻入路的绝对禁忌征。	Size (up to 3 cm), mild to moderate vascular encasement, and pial invasion (as evidenced by intracerebral edema) are not considered strong contraindications for using an endoscopic approach based on the experience of the surgeon.
内镜下，术者同样能够轻松地进行显微操作分离血管。	Microsurgical techniques are readily possible through this route to dissect the engulfed arteries.
经鼻入路在暴露阶段就已经将受累骨质一并去除，因此能够实现小型肿瘤的Simpson I级切除，而经颅入路却难以完成同等程度的切除。	Simpson grade 1 resection is possible through the transnasal route for smaller lesions as the affected bone is removed during the transnasal exposure, whereas this grade of resection is difficult to achieve through the transcranial route.
此外，经鼻入路术中不需要牵拉视器和脑组织，并且可以充分减压视神经管的内侧部。	Retraction of the optic apparatus and brain parenchyma is avoided and the optic canals are generously decompressed along their medial aspects via the endoscopic endonasal approach.
该入路的脑脊液漏概率约为10％。	The risk of CSF leak remains approximately 10% using this approach.
总之，视交叉下的肿瘤应该通过视交叉下的手术通道到达，从而避免视器遭受牵拉伤。	In summary, an infrachiasmatic tumor demands an infrachiasmatic operative route to prevent retraction injury to the optic apparatus.
但是，笔者偏好采用翼点入路切除大型TSMs（3-4cm）。	However, for large lesions (3-4 cm), I prefer to use the pterional craniotomy.
近十年来，笔者仅将双侧额下入路用于处理前颅底－鼻腔的沟通性肿瘤（比如嗅神经母细胞瘤和软骨肉瘤），而不用于处理任何纯粹的颅内肿瘤。	During the past decade, I have not used the bilateral subfrontal approach for any primary intradural tumors and have reserved this extensive craniotomy for extradural tumors involving the anterior skull base and extending into the nasal cavity (such as esthesioblastomas and chondrosarcomas).
实施翼点入路时，去除蝶骨嵴并进行硬膜外前床突切除以在手术早期减压同侧视神经，便于后续的硬膜下操作阶段能够移动视神经。	When using the pterional approach, I osteotomize the lateral sphenoid wing and perform an extradural anterior clinoidectomy to thoroughly decompress the ipsilateral optic nerve early in dissection in order to facilitate its mobilization during the intradural portion of the operation.
图4:这是一张展示肿瘤与颅内、外解剖标志关系的路图。	Figure 4: A roadmap to the tumor in relation to the external and internal landmarks is illustrated.
通过翼点入路提供的侧方通道，术者可以较早地识别肿瘤后方重要的神经血管结构。	The lateral pterional trajectory provides an early access to the vital cerebrovascular structures along the posterior aspect of the tumor.
图5:起始时使用咬骨钳咬除外侧蝶骨嵴，然后磨平眶顶。	Figure 5: The lateral sphenoid ridge is initially removed using a rongeur, and the roof of the orbit is then flattened.
一并打低额部的骨窗下缘使其与眶顶齐平，这样便可通过额下通道无遮挡地到达鞍旁区域。	The edge of the craniotomy along the supraorbital region is drilled flat and parallel to the roof of the orbit; this maneuver provides an unobstructed view to the parasellar area through the subfrontal corridor.
随后实施硬膜外前床突切除术。	An extradural clinoidectomy is then completed.
切除前床突实现同侧视神经的硬膜外减压之后剪开硬脑膜。	After extradural decompression of the ipsilateral optic nerve via clinoidectomy, the dura is incised.
图6:沿着前肢（anterior limb of sylvian fissure）解剖侧裂。	Figure 6: The Sylvian fissure is dissected open along its anterior limb.
图中经右侧额下通道展示了肿瘤与右侧视神经（箭头）、视交叉和颈内动脉的关系。	In this illustration, a right subfrontal exposure demonstrates the tumor in relation to the right optic nerve (arrow), chiasm, and internal carotid artery.
早期识别这些神经血管有助于防止损伤它们。	Early identification of these neurovascular strucutres keeps them out of harm’s way.
广泛松解该区域的蛛网膜后从视神经－颈内动脉池释放脑脊液可以促使脑组织松弛并避免使用坚硬的牵开器。	Wide dissection of the regional arachnoid membranes and release of CSF from the opticocarotid cisterns will promote brain relaxation and obviate the need for rigid retractors.
图7:先前已经在硬膜外切除了前床突，所以镰状韧带能够被轻易切断以充分减压同侧视神经（左图）。	Figure 7: Since an extradural clinoidectomy was completed during the earlier stages of the operation, the falciform ligament can be readily cut (left), leading to generous decompression of the ipsilateral optic nerve.
或者也可以使用金刚钻和弯的刮匙从硬膜内进行前床突切除/截骨（右图）。	Alternatively, an intradural clinoidectomy/osteotomy will allow unroofing of the nerve (right).
注意要保持足够的冲洗以防对视神经造成热损伤。	Diamond burrs and angled currettes are used through copious irrigation to prevent thermal injury to the optic nerve.
切忌使用双极电凝过度烧灼视神经周围的肿瘤。	Aggressive bipolar coagulation of the tumor around the nerve is avoided.
遵循如下顺序有助于切除肿瘤（切除脑膜瘤的4Ds原则）：1)裸露肿瘤（Dedress）；2）断除肿瘤基底的血供（Devascularize）；3）肿瘤减压（Debulk）；4）最后沿蛛网膜界面分离肿瘤（Dissect）。	It is beneficial to approach resection of meningiomas using the following algorithm (4Ds of meningiomas): 1)Dedress the tumor, 2)Devascularize the base of the tumor, 3)Debulk the tumor, and finally, 4)Dissect the tumor along its preserved arachnoid planes.
图8：随后从肿瘤基底断除血供，肿瘤基底以鞍结节为中心并延伸至蝶骨平台。	Figure 8: Next, the tumor is devascularized along its base centered over the tuberculum sella and extending over the planum sphenoidale.
分离操作应该沿着旁中线，否则可能会误伤肿瘤后方处于视野盲区的对侧视神经。	Dissection should stay along the paramidline to prevent inadvertent injury to the contralateral optic nerve that is within the surgeon’s blind spot behind the tumor.
继续往后离断基底。	Note the extension of the tumor into the ipsilateral medial optic foramen.
请留意此例肿瘤已经侵犯同侧视神经管口的内侧部。	This devascularization extends posteriorly into the sella.
图9：接着使用超声刀或者垂体抓钳减压肿瘤。	Figure 9: Next, the tumor is debulked using an ultrasonic aspirator or pituitary rongeurs.
这一步的所有操作都必须局限于肿瘤包膜内并沿着颅底旁中线进行，以防损伤包膜外那些至关重要的结构，包括颈内动脉或ACA发出的穿支。	All manipulations are executed within the tumor capsule and along the paramidline skull base to prevent injury to the vital extracapsular structures including the perforators of the internal carotid arteries or ACA branches.
图10：充分减压之后，沿着肿瘤与同侧视神经、视交叉之间的蛛网膜界面做锐性分离。	Figure 10: After aggressively debulking the tumor, I use sharp microsurgical techniques to dissect the arachnoid planes between the tumor capsule and ipsilateral optic nerve and chiasm.
肿瘤压扁并粘附于视神经时，辨认两者之间的间隙会很困难。	The tumor can flatten and attach to the nerve, complicating creation of a safe dissection plane between the nerve and the tumor.
术者应该轻轻牵开肿瘤耐心分离。	In this circumstance, the surgeon should patiently dissect and gently mobilize the tumor away from the nerve.
如果实在无法找到安全界面，可以在神经表面残留一层薄片状肿瘤，但是要打开视神经管口。	If dissection planes cannot be safely developed, a thin sheet of tumor is left on the nerve and the optic foramen is unroofed.
下图箭头指示切开镰状韧带后视神经能够获得额外减压的部位。	The site of nerve compression after opening of the falciform ligament is demonstrated (lower photo, arrow).
通常肿瘤与大脑前动脉和颈内动脉粘连不紧，容易分离。	The anterior cerebral and internal carotid arteries are usually not densely adherent to the tumor and are readily dissected away.
图11：继续沿蛛网膜界面锐性分离并保留所有软脑膜，按照从前往后的顺序从肿瘤表面游离出同侧视神经和视交叉，随后便可以显露视交叉的对侧部分和对侧视神经的后部（下图，T：肿瘤）。	Figure 11: Continuing sharp arachnoid dissection while preserving all pial planes, I carefully extract the tumor away from the ipsilateral optic nerve and chiasm from the anterior to posterior direction (top illustration). This critical step leads to the exposure of the contralateral chiasm and posterior aspect of the contralateral optic nerve (bottom photo, T:Tumor).
过度骚扰视交叉势必导致不同程度的视觉损害。	Aggressive manipulation of the chiasm invariably leads to worsening of vision.
必须牢记是将肿瘤牵离视神经，而不是将视神经牵离肿瘤。	The tumor should be mobilized away from the chiasm, not vice versa.
此时已经可以从肿瘤上极松解大脑前动脉。	Anterior cerebral arteries are also released from the superior pole of the tumor capsule at this step of the operation.
在额底，沿软脑膜-肿瘤包膜界面进行分离。	Extra-pial capsular dissection will detach the tumor from the base of the frontal lobe.
视交叉池和视神经-颈内动脉池为分离、移动肿瘤包膜提供了手术通道。	The interoptic and the opticocarotid cisterns are employed as operative corridors to dissect and mobilize the tumor capsule.
在视神经-颈内动脉间隙操作时，应该使用手中的吸引器间断牵拉颈内动脉，而不是视器。	When working in the opticocarotid space, I retract the carotid artery intermittently using the hand held suction device rather than retracting the optic apparatus.
分离肿瘤后方的垂体柄很容易。	The pituitary stalk is readily dissected from the posterior aspect of the tumor.
保护好垂体柄有助于预防术后垂体功能障碍。	Its careful preservation is pertinent for preventing postoperative pituitary gland dysfunction.
长入鞍内的肿瘤可以将其轻轻拖出随后切除。	The portion of the tumor invading the sella can be gently pulled into the resection cavity.
不要试图绕过肿瘤前缘去寻找对侧的视神经，因为肿瘤出血情况下，这种操作具有一定的盲目性，会危害神经。	I usually avoid going across the anterior pole of the tumor to find the contralateral optic nerve at its foramen as this maneuver can be hazardous during tumor bleeding, potentially necessitating blind dissection.
图12：上图演示去除中空的肿瘤。	Figure 12: The bulk of the tumor is removed (upper photo).
视神经管的内侧部经对侧视角探查更容易（下图），管内的肿瘤通常与周围没有粘连，可以使用小的垂体抓钳取出。	It is necesssary to inspect both optic canals for presence of any residual or overlooked tumor. The medial aspect of the canal is most easily inspected along the contralateral optic nerve by using a cross-court approach (bottom illustration).
视神经管内的肿瘤如果有残余会出现肿胀并导致迟发性视力下降。	Inadequate removal of the tumor may potentially account for delayed visual deterioration due to swelling of the residual tumor within the canal. The intracanalicular components of the tumor are typically nonadherent and can be dislodged using fine pituitary rongeurs.
图13：双极电凝灼烧前颅底被浸润的硬脑膜。	Figure 13: The infiltrated dura along the anterior skull base is cauterized using bipolar electrocautery.
如果同时有骨质受累，应该使用金刚钻磨除。	If the underlying bone is involved, it is resected using a diamond burr.
CT引导的神经导航有助于确定骨质切除的范围。	CT-guided neuronavigation can determine the extent of bony drilling.
术中如果打开了筛窦，还应该将其粘膜去除并用大块脂肪组织填塞窦腔。	If the ethmoid air sinuses are encountered, their mucosa is exenterated and filled with a large piece of fat graft.
随后表面用一片足够宽的颅骨膜覆盖。	A generous piece of pericranium is placed to cover the defect.
经颅入路重建鞍结节周围的前颅底具有相当大的挑战性，笔者往往会避免打开鼻窦。	I usually avoid entry into the air sinuses as reconstruction of the anterior skull base in the region of the tuberculum sella via the transcranial approach can be challenging.
其他注意事项	Additional Considerations
有时视神经会被肿瘤挤压变形得非常菲薄使得外科医师认为无法建立安全的分离界面。	The optic nerve can be quite attenuated and bowed by the tumor, making the surgeon believe a safe plane of dissection between the two is unattainable.
安全分离视神经和肿瘤所需间隙的大小取决于术者的经验。	The extent of safe persistence needed to dissect the two away from each other depends on the experience of the surgeon.
图14：通过左侧翼点入路切除一例大型TSM。	Figure 14: This large TSM was exposed through a left-sided pterional craniotomy.
最初的探查发现视神经和肿瘤粘连很紧密（上图）。	Upon initial inspection, the optic nerve, I found the nerve very adherent to the tumor (top image).
解剖蛛网膜后可逐步建立一个安全的分离界面（中图）。	Further dissection of the overlying arachnoid membranes revealed a more distinguishable plane between the tumor and the nerve (middle photo).
随后减压肿瘤并锐性分离使肿瘤能够被牵离视神经（下图）。	Tumor decompression followed by sharp dissection allowed safe mobilization of the tumor away from the nerve (bottom photo).
术后48h内复查MRI，约6周后评估患者的视野和垂体激素水平。	A follow-up MRI is obtained within 48 hours of surgery. Visual field and pituitary hormonal axis evaluation is conducted approximately 6 weeks after surgery.
术后即时出现视力下降与术中视器受牵拉和/或失血运有关。	Immediate postoperative visual deterioration is related to optic apparatus retraction and/or devascularization.
术后失明者远期也不可能恢复。	Patients who suffer blindness after surgery are unlikely to improve long-term.
术后迟发性视力下降可能是因为穿支血管痉挛或者视神经管内残余肿瘤肿胀。	Delayed postoperative deterioration is potentially related to the swelling of the residual tumor within the canal or vasospasm of regional perforators.
因此，如果术中有骚扰到穿支动脉，术毕时可以用罂粟碱或者维拉帕米溶液冲洗术腔。	Therefore, if manipulation of perforators is noted intraoperatively, I irrigate the resection cavity with papaverine or verapamil solution before closure.
· 和筛板脑膜瘤相比，大多数TSMs被发现时体积更小、能够通过内镜经鼻入路切除。	Most TSMs present in a smaller size than their counterpart cribriform plate meningiomas and can be resected through endoscopic endonasal surgery.
· 保护供应视交叉的穿支动脉是手术成功的关键。	Preservation of perforating feeders to the chiasm is critical for success.
任何情况下都应该避免过度骚扰视器。	Aggressive manipulation of the optic apparatus should be avoided at all costs.
· 切除视神经管内肿瘤（一般位于视神经内侧）可取得最佳手术效果。	The intraforaminal portion of the tumor typically resides medial to the optic nerve and should be removed for optimal outcomes.
蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤	Medial Sphenoid Wing Meningioma
大约15%-20%的脑膜瘤来源于蝶骨嵴，而其中大约一半起源于蝶骨嵴内侧。	Approximately 15-20% of all meningiomas arise from the sphenoid wing, with about half of these arising from the medial portion of the wing.
蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤是一组起源自前床突和蝶骨小翼内1/3的异质性肿瘤，包括球形和伴有骨增生的扁平型肿瘤（所谓的蝶骨-眼眶型脑膜瘤）。	Medial sphenoid wing meningiomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors originating from the anterior clinoid and the medial third of the lesser sphenoid wing. This group includes both globular and hyperostoti.e.plaque tumors (also called “spheno-orbital” meningiomas).
蝶骨-眼眶型脑膜瘤将在“蝶骨嵴外侧型脑膜瘤”一章中介绍。	Spheno-orbital meningiomas will be discussed in the Lateral Sphenoid Wing Meningioma chapter.
对于蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤，并无特异的病理或遗传学特点，部分肿瘤可因离子辐射所引起。	There are no specific pathologic or genetic features for medial sphenoid wing meningiomas. Some of these tumors are caused by ionizing radiation.
由于鞍旁有关键的神经血管结构，蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤的手术极具挑战性。	Surgical management of medial sphenoid wing meningiomas is challenging because of the closely associated critical neurovascular structures along the parasellar region.
肿瘤可从床突或蝶骨小翼任意部位的硬脑膜上长出，并向内侧生长，其临床表现和手术处理具有很大的差别。	Meningiomas can originate from any part of the meninges along the clinoid process or lesser sphenoid wing and grow medially, so clinical presentation and technical details of surgical treatment vary accordingly.
根据起源部位，蝶骨嵴脑膜瘤可分为以下三组：起源自前床突和蝶骨翼内侧1/3；起源自蝶骨翼中和外1/3；蝶骨翼上匍匐状生长的脑膜瘤。	Sphenoid wing meningiomas can be divided into three main groups based on the site of their origin: those arising from the anterior clinoid and medial third of the sphenoid wing; those arising from the middle and lateral sphenoid wing; and en plaque meningiomas of the sphenoid wing.
在本章节内，笔者将讨论前床突和蝶骨翼内侧球状脑膜瘤的手术切除技巧。	In this chapter, I will discuss techniques for resection of globular meningiomas of the anterior clinoid and medial portions of the sphenoid wing.
Simpson分级仍然是预测手术后脑膜瘤复发风险最实用的方法。	The Simpson scale remains the most practical method to predict the risk of meningioma recurrence following resection.
表1：Simpson分级用于预测术后脑膜瘤复发风险	Table 1: Simpson Scale for Prediction of Meningioma Recurrence after Surgery
I同时切除硬脑膜和骨质9%	I	Complete with associated dura and bone removal	9%
II同时电凝烧灼硬脑膜19%	II	Complete with coagulation of dural attachment	19%
III未电凝烧灼硬脑膜29%	III	Complete without dural coagulation	29%
IV次全切除40%	IV	Subtotal resection	40%
分类	Classification
根据起源于前床突的位置不同，前床突脑膜瘤又被分为3组不同类型。	Anterior clinoid meningiomas are further classified into three following subgroups based on their site of origin along the anterior clinoid.
每种类型手术切除难易程度不同，但均累及颈内动脉（internal carotid artery，ICA）和视器，也可能包括动眼神经。	Each group offers a unique set of technical difficulty for microsurgery, but all three typically involve both the internal carotid artery (ICA) and the optic apparatus and potentially the oculomotor nerve.
当ICA从前床突下方和内侧穿出海绵窦时，将通过内环和外环（上环和下环）之间的硬膜下腔，这个1-2mm的节段内无蛛网膜覆盖，如脑膜瘤从该节段发出，则归为第一组床突脑膜瘤。	As the ICA emerges from the cavernous sinus inferior and medial to the anterior clinoid process, it passes through the subdural space between the inner and outer (or upper and lower) dural rings where 1-2mm of its segment lacks arachnoidal covering. Meningiomas arising around this short segment are classified as Group 1 clinoidal meningiomas.
图1：侧方显示海绵窦和右侧ICA的床突段。	Figure 1: A lateral view of the cavernous sinus and clinoidal segments of the right ICA.
注意位于上环和下环之间的一小段ICA，此处为第一组床突脑膜瘤起源的地方（插图引自AL Rhoton，Jr）。	Note the short ICA segment between the upper and lower dural rings where group 1 clinoidal meningiomas arise from (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
第一组床突脑膜瘤往往会包绕ICA，向ICA分叉部生长并包绕大脑中动脉近端。	As Group 1 tumors grow, they typically engulf the ICA, grow distally toward the ICA bifurcation and encase the proximal middle cerebral artery.
由于缺乏蛛网膜平面，这类肿瘤与ICA的外膜粘连紧密，导致切除困难，手术治愈率低。	Because they lack an intervening arachnoidal plane, they are densely adherent to the adventitia of the ICA, rendering dissection difficult and resulting in lower rates of surgical cure.
第一组肿瘤同时会累及视神经和视交叉，但是该区域肿瘤表面有蛛网膜覆盖，有利于手术分离。	Group 1 tumors also typically involve the optic nerve and chiasm, but an arachnoid plane invests the tumor in this region, facilitating dissection.
该组肿瘤常常会侵犯海绵窦。	Group 1 tumors frequently invade the cavernous sinus.
第二组床突脑膜瘤起源自前床突上方和外侧的硬脑膜。	Group 2 clinoidal meningiomas arise from the superior and lateral aspects of the anterior clinoid dura.
这类肿瘤常常包绕ICA，但是被颈动脉池的蛛网膜包裹，提供了天然的分离平面。	These tumors often engulf the ICA as they grow, but are invested by the arachnoidal layers of the carotid cistern, creating accessible dissection planes.
此外，这些肿瘤与视神经和视交叉之间亦存在蛛网膜平面。	Additionally, these tumors own arachnoidal dissection planes within the region of the optic nerve and chiasm.
海绵窦侵犯在这类肿瘤中属于常见现象。	Cavernous sinus invasion is common.
与第一组相比，该组脑膜瘤更容易达到积极和安全的切除。	These tumors are therefore more amenable to aggressive safe resection than group 1 tumors.
第三组床突脑膜瘤从视神经孔发出，并延伸入视神经管内。	Group 3 clinoidal meningiomas arise from the optic foramen and extend into the optic canal.
鉴于其起源部位和生长方式，该组肿瘤更容易引起临床症状，诊断时体积也更小。	Because of their site of origin and growth pattern, group 3 tumors become symptomatic earlier than Group 1 and 2 tumors and are substantially smaller at the time of their diagnosis.
这类肿瘤与ICA周围亦存在蛛网膜，但由于其起源处远离视交叉，因而与视器之间无明显的蛛网膜平面。	These tumors are invested by arachnoid membranes in the area of the ICA, but because they originate away from the chiasmatic cistern, there is typically no obvious arachnoid plane between the tumor and the optic apparatus.
因此，手术治愈的可能性降低，且术后视力减退的风险更高。	As a result, surgical cure is less common and the risk of postoperative visual decline is more real.
由蝶骨翼中部起源的脑膜瘤，在出现临床表现前体积已非常大。	The tumors arising from the middle portion of the sphenoid wing grow very large before their clinical presentation.
压迫颞叶形成显著的占位效应，而且如果向内侧延伸则会导致视觉障碍。	They cause significant mass effect on the temporal lobe, and if they have enough medial extension, they cause visual disturbance.
对于未向内侧侵犯的小型肿瘤，在切除蝶骨翼后，可以像凸面脑膜瘤一样处理。	Smaller lesions without medial extension can be treated like convexity meningiomas after resection of the sphenoid wing.
床突和蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜最常见的临床表现为头痛和视觉障碍，包括视物模糊，视野缺损，或视神经萎缩（由视器受压所致）或复视（由动眼神经扭曲所致）。	The most common clinical presentation of clinoidal and medial sphenoid wing meningiomas are headaches and visual disturbance such as blurred vision, visual field deficit, or optic atrophy (resulting from optic apparatus compression) or diplopia (resulting from oculomotor nerve distortion).
侵犯海绵窦或眶上裂的肿瘤可能会导致更多的颅神经病变。	Tumors that invade the cavernous sinus or superior orbital fissure may cause additional cranial neuropathies.
向中颅窝延伸的巨大肿瘤会压迫颞叶或脑干，分别导致癫痫发作或偏瘫。	Large tumors with middle cranial fossa extension compressing the temporal lobe or brainstem result in seizures or hemiparesis, respectively.
这类肿瘤亦可导致认知和记忆障碍，人格改变，失语。	Such tumors may also cause cognitive and memory deficits, personality changes, and dysphasia.
肿瘤导致蝶骨翼和眶外侧壁骨质增厚，可能会引起突眼，复视和眼眶疼痛。	Tumor-induced hyperostosis of the sphenoid wing and lateral orbit may present with proptosis, diplopia, and orbital pain.
蝶骨翼扁平型脑膜瘤，又称为蝶骨-眼眶脑膜瘤，即可出现上述眼眶表现。	En plaque meningiomas of the sphenoid wing, also called spheno-orbital meningiomas, present with such ocular manifestations.
这些肿瘤侵犯海绵窦外侧壁、眶上裂、中颅窝底和颅外的颞下窝。	These tumors can invade the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, superior orbital fissure, floor of the middle cranial fossa, and the extracranial infratemporal fossa.
对患者进行详细的病史追溯和查体，尤其注意上述症状和体征。	A thorough history and physical exam with particular attention to the symptoms and signs mentioned above are required.
薄层或高分辨磁共振（MRI）检查，包括眼眶的脂肪抑制，可用于评估眼眶受累程度。	Thin-cut or high-resolution magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, while including fat suppression sequences through the orbits, can assess orbital involvement.
磁共振血管造影或CT血管造影，可用于评估脑膜瘤与周围血管的关系和包绕的程度。	Angiographic evaluation with MR angiography or computed tomography (CT) angiography determines the meningioma’s relationship to the surrounding vasculature and their degree of encasement.
实际情况中很少需要用到以上检查，因为T2相MRI往往足以识别相关的血管结构。	However, these studies are rarely necessary as the T2-weighted MR images are adequate for identification of relevant vasculature.
CT血管造影的骨窗可以帮助判断肿瘤侵犯所继发的骨质增厚程度。	The bone windows on CT angiography also determine the extent of tumor-infiltrated hyperostosis.
导管血管造影可由于术前栓塞，或者在ICA包绕、术中损伤风险较大的情况下，通过临时球囊阻断以评估侧枝循环的代偿情况。	Catheter angiography can demonstrates the utility of preoperative embolization and estimates the robustness of collateral blood supply via a temporary balloon occlusion test if the ICA is encased and at a high risk of operative injury.
不过，笔者个人建议，考虑到肿瘤良性生长，可行次全切除以尽量保全ICA。	However, I advocate subtotal removal of this benign tumor in an attempt to preserve the ICA.
随着放射疗法的普及，不主张冒着缺血性损伤的风险进行更加激进的手术切除。	With the availability of radiosurgery, the associated ischemic risks of a more aggressive resection are not warranted.
对于大部分脑膜瘤，笔者并不认为需要进行介入栓塞，因为在暴露的早期，通过切除蝶骨翼和前床突，以及电凝受累的硬脑膜可离断大部分的肿瘤血供。	I do not believe endovascular embolization is necessary for most meningiomas as they can be devascularized early during exposure by aggressive resection of the sphenoid wing and anterior clinoid as well as cauterization of the involved dura.
对于所有症状性的鞍旁占位，包括脑膜瘤，应进行详尽的神经-眼科检查和内分泌系统的评估。	A thorough neuro-opthalmologic and endocrinologic assessment should be performed as part of evaluation for all symptomatic parasellar tumors, including meningiomas.
图2：根据蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤是否侵犯内侧神经血管和包绕颈动脉穿支血管，可表现出不同的手术难度。	Figure 2: Medial sphenoid wing meningiomas can present different set of technical challenges based on their involvement of the medial neurovascular structures and the encasement of the carotid artery’s perforating vessels.
上图所示为一例向内侧轻度延伸的脑膜瘤，侧裂大脑中动脉分支覆盖在肿瘤的上极。	A medial sphenoid wing meningioma with minimal medial extension is shown (upper images). The Sylvian middle cerebral artery branches drape over the superior pole of the tumor.
下图所示为一例真正意义上的蝶骨嵴/床突内侧型脑膜瘤，向内侧显著生长并包绕ICA。	A more true medial sphenoid wing/clinoidal meningioma with significant medial extension and encasement of the ICA is also included (lower images).
图3：一例第三组或右侧视神经孔脑膜瘤。	Figure 3: A group 3 or right-sided optic foramen meningioma is demonstrated.
肿块所处的关键位置导致相对快速的视力恶化，使得肿瘤在早期得以发现。	The strategic location of this mass leads to its early discovery due to the associated relatively rapid course of visual deterioration.
手术指征	Indications for Procedure
手术切除仍然是处理蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤的首选方案。	Surgical resection is the mainstay of treatment for medial sphenoid wing meningiomas.
立体定向放射治疗对于无症状的、未产生占位效应的小肿瘤而言是一种可行方案，但是肿瘤附近的视交叉和视神经对放射损伤高度敏感，阻碍了该技术的应用。	Stereotactic radiosurgery is an option for asymptomatic small tumors without mass effect, but the proximity of highly radiosensitive optic chiasm and nerves often precludes its use.
对于小的、偶然发现的肿瘤，随访观察不失为一种合理的处理方案。	Observation is also a reasonable treatment plan for small incidental tumors.
图4：冠状位和轴位图片显示蝶骨嵴中部/内侧脑膜瘤与周围血管结构之间的典型关系。	Figure 4: Coronal and axial views of a middle/medial sphenoid wing meningioma with its typical relationship to the surrounding vascular structures is demonstrated.
往往可发现更为明显的视器受压的证据。	More prominent evidence of optic apparatus compression is usually present.
CT可测量骨质侵犯或骨质增厚的程度，用于术中导航定位，以便全切受累骨质，达到Simpson 1级切除。	Computed tomography (CT) measures the extent of bony invasion or hyperostosis. This information is important for intraoperative navigation to guide gross total resection of the involved bone and achieving Simpson scale 1 outcome.
CT检查还可以评估是否需要在术前准备植入物，以重建切除的骨质。	This CT data also determines the potential need to prepare a custom implant preoperatively to reconstruct the area of resected bone.
术前了解肿瘤对正常血管结构的影响，可以有效避免术中灾难性的血管损伤。	Preoperative understanding of how the tumor has distorted the normal vasculature is beneficial to avoid catastrophic vascular injury.
此外，如果存在严重的颅底血管包绕，则需要做好次全切除的准备，因为在肿瘤切除的过程中，小的ICA穿支动脉及其容易受到损伤。	Furthermore, significant vascular encasement at the skull base highlights the need for planned subtotal resection as small caliber ICA perforating arteries are highly vulnerable to arterial injury and dissection during tumor excision.
MRI可以为此提供必要的参考。	Magnetic resonance (MR) images provide the necessary information.
通过放置腰大池引流，可以在早期降低脑压，以便在硬膜外切除遮挡的前床突，这样在处理肿瘤前即可对受累视神经进行减压。	A lumbar drain can decompress the brain early and allow for an obstructed extradural clinoidectomy to release the affected optic nerve before the tumor is manipulated.
除了骨性解剖结构，熟悉床突旁血管和视器的解剖，对于处理蝶骨嵴内侧脑膜瘤也是非常重要的。	Familiarity with the paraclinoid vascular and optic apparatus anatomy in addition to bony morphology is important.
图5：前中颅窝底的骨性解剖特点。	Figure 5: Osteology of the anterior and middle cranial base is shown.
注意蝶骨小翼，前床突和轴位的骨性结构（插图来自AL Rhoton，Jr）。	Note the lesser sphenoid wing, anterior clinoid process and surrounding bony structures (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
硬膜外床突切除有助于早期暴露肿瘤基底，方便离断血供。	Extradural clinoidectomy can expose the base of the tumor early and facilitate its devascularization.
此外，硬膜外视神经减压可以在膜内处理肿瘤前对神经进行保护，以避免受到牵拉损伤。	Furthermore, extradural optic nerve decompression protects the nerve early before any intradural tumor manipulation places the nerve at risk of traction injury.
图6：从不同的解剖视角看前床突、海绵窦和相关的神经血管结构。	Figure 6: Different anatomical views of the anterior clinoid processes, cavernous sinus, and their associated neurovascular structures.
移除右侧前床突的硬脑膜（插图来自AL Rhoton，Jr）。	The dura is removed over the right anterior clinoid process (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
由于视神经内侧存在一定的潜在空间，因此大部分脑膜瘤从此处进入视神经管。	Most meningiomas enter the optic canal medial to the nerve because of the availability of a potential space there.
在切除前床突和肿瘤的过程中，动眼神经容易受到损伤。	The oculomotor nerve is at risk of injury during clinoidectomy and tumor resection.
蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤可侵犯海绵窦，即便如此，该部分肿瘤应予以残留，以避免海绵窦内操作所带来的风险。	Medial sphenoid wing meningiomas may infiltrate the cavernous sinus; however, this portion of the tumor should be left behind because of the risk of operating within the cavernous sinus.
蝶骨嵴内侧脑膜瘤的切除	RESECTION OF MEDIAL SPHENOID WING MENINGIOMA
大部分蝶骨嵴内侧脑膜瘤可通过扩大翼点入路进行手术。	Most medial sphenoid wing meningiomas can be resected through the extended pterional craniotomy.
如果病灶位于鞍上的成分较大，眶颧入路可以在额叶最小程度的牵拉下提供绝佳的手术视角。	If the lesion harbors a significant suprasellar component, the orbitozygomatic craniotomy affords an excellent exposure of the suprasellar extent of the tumor with minimal frontal lobe retraction.
对于眶内延伸的肿瘤，也需要眶颧开颅或眶骨切开以暴露眼眶，切除肿瘤，纠正突眼。	Tumors with intraorbital extension also require an orbitozygomatic/orbital osteotomy to expose the orbit, remove the tumor and correct the proptosis.
在90%的蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤中，笔者采用扩大翼点入路，并在硬膜外切除前床突。	I use the extended pterional craniotomy with extradural clinoidectomy for 90% of medial sphenoid wing meningiomas.
围手术期预防性使用抗癫痫药物存在争议。	The use of prophylactic perioperative antiepileptic medications is controversial.
笔者个人偏向在手术中给予负荷剂量，术后续用7天。	I prefer to administer a loading dose of this medication at surgery and continue the medication for 7 days postoperatively.
围手术期如未有癫痫发作，术后1周左右就逐步减量。	In the absence of any seizure within the perioperative period, this medication is tapered off around 1 week after surgery.
但如果患者期间发生癫痫，则需增加药物剂量，并需用半年至1年。	If the patient suffers from any seizure activity during the perioperative period, the dose may be increased and continued for 6 months to 1 year.
由于较大的肿瘤会占据视神经颈内动脉池，阻碍早期的脑脊液引流，笔者习惯在麻醉诱导后放置腰大池引流，以降低脑压。	Since larger tumors fill the opticocarotid cisterns and often prevent early cerebrospinal fluid drainage for brain relaxation, I implant a lumbar drain after induction of the anesthesia to promote brain relaxation.
这在手术过程中非常重要：1）即便肿瘤位于蝶骨翼内侧，脑组织的松弛使得硬膜外切除床突成为可能；2）在肿瘤分块切除前，即可在硬膜外和硬膜下离断肿瘤血供，将肿瘤从颅底游离出来。	This relaxation is important for 1) making extradural clinoidectomy possible despite the tumor overlying the medial sphenoid wing, 2) early extra- and intradural aggressive tumor devascularization and disconnection through mobilization of the tumor base away from the skull base before its debulking.
对于伴有严重水肿的占位效应的巨大肿瘤，需谨慎和缓慢地引流脑脊液，最好在打开硬脑膜后进行，以避免天幕疝的发生。	For giant tumors with significant edema and mass effect, CSF drainage should be conducted judiciously and gradually, preferably after dural opening to avoid transtentorial herniation.
在手术开始时就过度引流脑脊液，会导致侧裂分离更加困难。	Overdrainage of cerebrospinal fluid at the outset of surgery can also potentially make dissection of the Sylvian fissure more difficult.
请阅读“硬膜外前床突切除”章节，以便掌握手术早期开颅后的基本操作细节。	Please refer to the Extradural Clinoidectomy chapter for further details regarding the initial steps of the operation after craniotomy.
过度增生的床突骨质坚硬，极难磨除，如何安全地切除具有一定的挑战性。	Hyperostotic clinoid process can be challenging to safely remove, as the bone is very resistant to drilling.
在使用磨钻时，需骨骼化并仔细保护视神经，并用大量盐水冲洗。	The optic nerve should be skeletonized and carefully protected during heavy drilling using ample amount of irrigation fluid.
过度增生的床突将影响视神经孔和神经管的正常解剖结构。	Hypertrophied clinoid processes can distort the normal anatomy of the optic foramen/canal.
笔者会在术中CT导航帮助下定位视神经孔/管。	I use the assistance of intraoperative CT navigation to localize the foramen/canal.
一旦切除床突，位于蝶骨翼和床突表面硬膜的肿瘤基底血供，就可在膜外彻底离断。	Once the clinoidectomy is complete, the tumor’s base along the dura over the sphenoid wing and clinoid process is thoroughly devascularized extradurally.
在完成上述步骤后，笔者会新月形切开硬脑膜，分离前侧裂，以暴露脑膜瘤。	Once the above steps are complete, I open the dura in a crescent shape and expose the meningioma following an anterior sylvian fissure split.
通过腰大池缓慢地释放脑脊液，可达到理想的脑组织减压作用。	Slow egress of CSF via the lumbar drain achieves desirable brain relaxation.
图7：左侧扩大翼点开颅，切除床突后暴露肿瘤组织。	Figure 7: Exposure of the tumor through a left-sided extended pterional craniotomy after extradural clinoidectomy is shown.
在该病例中，大肿瘤由侧裂向外侧延伸。	In this case, the large tumor extended laterally through the Sylvian fissure.
通过腰大池缓慢释放约40ml脑脊液后（每次释放10ml），可将肿瘤从蝶骨翼硬脑膜外侧游离出来，并电凝其内侧的硬脑膜附着点。	Following ~40cc of gradual CSF drainage through the lumbar drain, in 10cc aliquots, the tumor is mobilized away from the lateral sphenoid wing dura and its more medial dural attachments coagulated.
该操作是手术中非常关键的一步，通过彻底阻断肿瘤血供，从而避免频繁的止血操作，加快后续的肿瘤切除过程。	This important maneuver completes a critical step in the operation that leads to thorough devascularization of the tumor and significantly expedites the later steps of dissection by minimizing the need to frequently interrupt tumor dissection/removal to obtain hemostasis.
图8：笔者会沿着前颅窝继续阻断肿瘤血供，同时需注意视神经的大致位置，以避免热损伤的发生。	Figure 8: I continue tumor devascularization along the anterior cranial fossa while keeping the approximate location of the optic nerve in mind to avoid its heat injury.
脑脊液引流，侧裂分离和吸引器的合理使用，可避免使用固定脑牵开器。	CSF drainage, Sylvian fissure split and strategic use of the hand held suction device obviate the need for fixed retractors.
图9：对实性肿瘤，用超声吸引器（左图）进行去核和分块减压，而对较软的肿瘤组织，用双极电凝、吸引器和垂体咬钳进行减压。	Figure 9:  Enucleation and debulking of firm tumors is conducted using an ultrasonic aspirator (left image) while softer tumors are debulked using bipolar electrocautery, suction apparatus and pituitary rongeurs.
接着，笔者会轻轻地牵拉肿瘤包膜，使得其塌陷入已切除的肿瘤核心处（右图）。	Next, I gently draw upon the tumor capsule to cause its collapse into the debulked core of the tumor (right image).
保持在肿瘤包膜内操作是非常重要的，否则会使得粘附在肿瘤内侧脆弱的脑血管结构受损风险增加。	It is critical to stay inside the tumor capsule. Violation of the capsule places the vulnerable adherent medial cerebrovascular structures at risk.
超声吸引器使用时需远离关键血管结构，否则即便没有直接接触，仍可能导致无法修复的血管损伤。	Vicinity of the ultrasonic aspirator to the vessels, even without an immediate contact, can lead to irreparable vascular injury. This device should be used away from the critical vascular structures.
图10：此时，在部分肿瘤减压，获得更多的操作空间后，笔者会进一步打开侧裂远端，辨别粘连在肿瘤上极和后极的M2分支血管。	Figure 10: At this juncture, after some tumor debulking to create more working space, I further split the distal aspect of Sylvian fissure and identify the M2 branches draped over the superior and posterior poles of the tumor capsule.
笔者还会沿着蝶骨翼，轻柔地向后方牵动肿瘤，以便发现或估计ICA在颅底的位置。	I also gently mobilize the tumor capsule posteriorly along the sphenoid wing in an attempt to find or estimate the location of the ICA at the skull base.
这两步可以帮助笔者估计MCA分支，包括M1段，沿着肿瘤内侧包膜的走形，而此处正是笔者的盲点。	These latter two maneuvers help me approximate the route of the MCA branches, including the M1, along the medial tumor capsule-my blind spot.
图11：所有MCA血管均锐性方式从肿瘤包膜外游离出来，并用棉片加以保护（上图）。	Figure 11:  All MCA vessels are sharply dissected off of the tumor capsule and protected with the use of cottonoids once mobilized (upper image).
应尽可能避免钝性分离。	Blunt dissection should be avoided when possible.
最重要的是，在处理血管前应清楚地识别肿瘤的供血动脉和过路血管。	Most importantly, the feeding arteries of the tumor and the vital en passage vessels are clearly identified before their fate is decided.
可用罂粟碱浸泡的明胶海绵处理过路血管，以减轻血管痉挛。	Pieces of papaverine-soaked Gelfoam are used to periodically bathe small en passage vessels for relief of their vasospasm.
高倍放大的术中视野示范如何将M2分支血管从肿瘤（T）表面分离（下图）。	Higher magnification intraoperative view demonstrates dissection of the M2 branches away from the tumor (T)(lower image).
尽管在影像上，肿瘤包绕血管的现象很常见，但是肿瘤与MCA分支之间完整的蛛网膜平面有助于将血管从肿瘤表面游离出去。	Although vascular encasement is common on imaging in these tumors, most often, the arachnoidal plane between the tumor and the MCA branches remains intact enough to dissect the vessel free from the tumor.
但是如果肿瘤与血管粘连过于紧密，应遗留一薄层肿瘤组织，以起到保护作用，避免发生血管痉挛。	If the tumor is too adherent for this maneuver, a small sheet of tumor must be left on the vessels for their protection and prevention of vasospasm.
图12：仔细地将肿瘤前极游离出来，对于识别位于颅底的视神经和ICA是非常重要的（上图）。	Figure 12: It is important to carefully mobilize the anterior frontal pole of the tumor in order to identify the optic nerve and ICA at the level of the skull base (upper image).
沿着蝶骨翼内侧走形，可以大致定位视神经管和ICA。	Following the contour of sphenoid wing medially, one can localize the approximate location of the optic canal and the ICA.
在下方的图片中，术中将肿瘤的前额部切除后，吸引器尖端所对的就是视神经和颈内动脉的位置。	In the lower intraoperative photo, the frontal portion of the tumors is removed and the location of the optic nerve and carotid artery is appreciated at the tip of the suction device.
电凝后残留的肿瘤组织位于天幕边缘。	Residual coagulated tumor is present along the tentorium.
图13：小心松动内侧的包膜，锐性分离可以游离出视神经和近端ICA。	Figure 13: Gentle mobilization of the medial capsule and sharp dissection will uncover the optic nerve and proximal ICA.
切开镰状韧带以松解视神经。	The falciform ligament is incised to untether the optic nerve.
可见后交通动脉起源自ICA后壁。	The posterior communicating artery can be seen originating from the posterior wall of ICA.
该血管可用于指示动眼神经。	This artery is an indicator for the general location of the oculomotor nerve.
如果肿瘤与神经或血管粘连紧密，需避免过度的操作和钝性分离，留下一薄层肿瘤组织。	It the tumor is very adherent to the nerves or vessels, aggressive manipulation and blunt dissection must be avoided and a sheet of tumor left behind.
即便轻柔地处理动眼神经和天幕周围的肿瘤组织，大多数患者术后仍会出现一过性动眼神经和滑车神经麻痹。	Despite gentle handling of the tumor around the oculomotor nerve and tentorium, most patients will suffer from transient third and fourth nerve palsies after surgery.
应尽量避免在这些血管周围电凝天幕。	Coagulation of the tentorium around these nerves should be minimized as much as feasible.
图14：接下来，笔者会将肿瘤后方的包膜与颞叶分开。	Figure 14: Next, I mobilize the posterior tumor capsule away from the temporal lobe.
肿瘤位于中颅底前方的基底已经被离断。	The base of the tumor along the anterior middle fossa is disconnected.
需要注意相关的重要神经血管结构，主要是后交通动脉、脉络膜前动脉和动眼神经，受到肿瘤推移后，这些结构很可能出现在无法预料的位置，导致术者判断错误，笔者宁可在探查时不放过每一个可疑的结构，也不愿造成无可挽回的损伤后追悔莫及。	I prefer to say “there it is” and be wrong 100 times, rather than say “there it was” and be right once. Neurovascular structures (more specifically, the posterior communicating artery, anterior choroidal arteries and the oculomotor nerve) are displaced and can be found in very unexpected locations.
在处理出血时，过度的电凝对保留周围的神经血管有害的。	They are in harm’s way during aggressive coagulation in face of bleeding.
肿瘤内侧有蛛网膜覆盖在基底池和脑干表面，予保持完整。	The medial arachnoid membranes over the basal cisterns and brainstem are left untouched.
图15：保留肿瘤包膜周边的蛛网膜平面非常重要。	Figure 15: It is essential to maintain the arachnoid planes along the entire circumference of the tumor capsule.
为避免脑梗死的发生，笔者会保留每一根穿支动脉，减少对它们的操作。	To prevent infarcts, I preserve every perforating artery and minimize its manipulation.
在全切肿瘤后，蝶骨翼内侧受侵犯的硬脑膜，笔者会电凝烧灼。	After gross total tumor resection, the infiltrated dura along the medial sphenoid wing is cauterized.
图示为切除肿瘤后的神经血管解剖结构。	The neurovascular anatomy at the end of resection is demonstrated.
接着，选用精细的、尖端为球形的探针探查视神经管。	The optic canal is then explored with a fine ball-tip dissector.
如果在此处发现肿瘤，应进一步切开镰状韧带，将视神经管去顶，以便在视神经管内拨除肿瘤。	If tumor is identified in this location, the falciform ligament is divided further and the optic nerve unroofed to allow intracanalicular tumor extraction.
强行拖拽与视神经粘连的肿瘤，会破坏神经的血供，导致视觉损伤加重。	Aggressive removal of attached tumor from the optic nerve can disrupt the nerve’s blood supply and worsen visual deficits.
如果肿瘤无法从神经上分离下来，应在神经表面残留一薄层肿瘤组织，同时行视神经管去顶。	If the tumor is not readily separable from the nerve, a thin sheet of tumor must be left on the nerve and the optic canal generously unroofed.
在敏感的动眼神经周围，应小心操作，避免神经永久性的麻痹。	Careful microsurgery around the sensitive oculomotor nerve is necessary to avoid permanent cranial nerve paresis.
避免进入海绵窦操作。	The cavernous sinus is not entered.
脑膜瘤手术中，第一次手术是获得治愈最好的时机。	In meningioma surgery, the first operation is the best opportunity for surgical cure.
因此，正确的手术哲学应该是在安全的基础上尽可能地切除肿瘤。	Therefore, safe aggressive tumor removal is an appropriate operative philosophy.
然而，如果肿瘤与近端ICA粘连，甚至包绕该段血管，应残留一薄层肿瘤组织。	However, if the tumor is adherent to the proximal ICA and encases this portion of the artery, a thin sheet of tumor must be left behind.
强行将粘连的肿瘤组织从该区域分离出去，将无可避免地损伤ICA内侧壁起源的小穿支血管，包括后交通动脉和脉络膜前动脉。	Dissection of adherent tumor in this region invariably leads to injury to the small perforators originating from the medial wall of the ICA, including the posterior communicating and anterior choroidal arteries.
遗憾的是，笔者本人经历过这种并发症的痛苦。	Unfortunately, I have suffered from the agony of this complication.
笔者的一个患者在切除一个巨大蝶骨嵴内侧脑膜瘤后，出现内囊后肢梗死，导致偏瘫。	One of my patients suffered from an infarct in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, causing hemiplegia, after removal of a giant medial sphenoid wing meningioma.
因此，对包绕血管的颅底肿瘤，笔者不建议进行过度的操作。	I therefore advise against aggressive manipulation of the attached encasing tumor along the skull base.
图16：视神经充分减压，但是对于包裹血管的坚硬/钙化肿瘤组织，未予强行切除，以避免穿支动脉的损伤（上图）。	Figure 16: The optic nerve is decompressed, but the adherent firm/calcified tumor encasing the vasculature is left behind to avoid injury to the perforating arteries (upper image).
下图术中图片所示，为肿瘤包裹了脉络膜前动脉或一根穿支动脉（箭头）。	The lower intraoperative photo demonstrates the anterior choroidal artery or one of the perforators (arrow) encased by the tumor.
该小部分肿瘤未予处理。	This piece of the tumor was not manipulated.
其他思考	Additional Considerations
纤维样肿瘤的分离切除具有挑战性，需要借助于其他的技术将肿瘤从视神经和颈内动脉上游离出去。	Dissection of fibrous tumors can be challenging and alternative techniques are necessary to mobilize the tumor from the optic nerve and the carotid artery.
图17：该蝶骨嵴内侧脑膜瘤的纤维样包膜很难松动，最后将肿瘤沿着ICA的长轴分为两半，才得以切除。	Figure 17: The fibrous capsule of this medial sphenoid wing meningioma that was resistant to mobilization was removed by dividing the tumor into two fragments parallel to the long axis of the ICA.
首先在颅底识别颈动脉近端和视神经（上图）。	The proximal carotid artery and optic nerve were first identified at the skull base (upper photo).
然后将肿瘤沿着ICA的长轴切开（下图），这样有利于松动肿瘤，并最终将肿瘤的前后两部分切除。	The tumor was subsequently divided along the axis of the ICA (lower photo). This division facilitated mobilization and removal of the anterior and posterior fragments of the tumor.
病例分析	Case Example
该患者因右侧视力减退就诊，诊断为巨大的蝶骨嵴内侧型脑膜瘤。	This patient presented with right-sided visual decline and was diagnosed with a large medial sphenoid wing meningioma.
图18：第一行MRI显示肿瘤的位置和眶顶骨质增厚。	Figure 18: The MR images of the first row demonstrate the mass and associated orbital roof hyperostosis.
硬膜外切除床突，早期对视神经进行减压。	Extradural clinoidectomy decompressed the optic nerve early.
游离并保护MCA远端分支（第二行）。	The distal MCA branches were dissected and protected (second row).
逐步向颅底解剖，将肿瘤沿着ICA分离出来，这样有助于松动肿瘤组织（最后一行，左图）。	As dissection continued toward the skull base, the tumor was divided along the ICA; this maneuver facilitated tumor mobilization (last row, left image).
在视神经孔远端找到视神经，通过切除管内肿瘤组织，将神经游离出来（最后一行，右图）。	The optic nerve was found distal in its foramen and generously released via removal of the intracanalicular portion of the tumor (last row, right image).
切除视神经管脑膜瘤	RESECTION OF OPTIC FORAMEN MENINGIOMA
视神经管脑膜瘤的切除相对直截了当，这些肿瘤往往在比较小的时候就被发现，且不会包绕血管。	Removal of optic foramen meningiomas is more straightforward as these tumors are discovered when they are small. They do not encase the vasculature.
但是，肿瘤与视器之间存在粘连。	However, they can adhere to the optic apparatus.
图19：图示为位于右侧视神经孔的第三组脑膜瘤（上图）。	Figure 19: A right optic foramen, group 3 meningioma, is demonstrated (top image).
硬膜外床突切开，打开视神经的顶面（中图），为硬膜内打开镰状韧带、切除视神经管内肿瘤做准备。	Extradural clinoidectomy unroofs the optic nerve (middle photo) in preparation of intradural opening of the falciform ligament and dissection of the tumor within the optic canal.
打开硬脑膜，抬起额叶，即可在神经内侧面看到向视神经管外延伸的肿瘤部分（下图）。	The extracanalicular extent of the tumor along the medial aspect of the nerve is shown upon dural opening and elevation of the frontal lobe (lower image).
图20：用Karlin刀片（Symmetric Surgical，Antioch，TN）切开肿瘤表面靠近术者一侧的镰状韧带（上图）。	Figure 20: A Karlin blade (Symmetric Surgical, Antioch, TN) is used to cut the falciform ligament on the side of the tumor toward the surgeon (top image).
用锐性分离技术将肿瘤位于视神经管外的部分从神经表面解剖出来，并用垂体咬钳将肿瘤剥除。	The extracanalicular component of the tumor is dissected away from the nerve using sharp techniques and delivered using pituitary rongeurs (bottom photos).
图21：保留供应视交叉的小穿支血管（上图），用带角度的剥离子将术野盲区中围绕视神经内侧的管内肿瘤部分分离出来（中图）。	Figure 21: The small perforating vessels to the chiasm are protected (top image) while an angled dissector mobilizes the more intracanalicular portion of the tumor around the medial optic nerve within the operative blind spot (middle image).
用带角度的直剥离子探查视神经管远端，以确保充分的减压，也可以用显微手术镜来加以确认（下图）。	Angled straight dissector inspects the distal part of the canal to ensure complete decompression of the canal; this finding is also verified using a microsurgical mirror (lower images).
关颅和术后照护	Closure and Postoperative Care
用一小片颞肌填塞硬膜外切除床突的位置，以防止术后脑脊液漏。	A small piece of temporalis muscle is used to plug the extradural space at the site of clinoidectomy to prevent a postoperative CSF leak.
手术结束时拔除腰大池引流管。	The lumbar drain is removed at the end of the operation.
术后照护与其他颅底肿瘤类似。	Postoperative care is similar to the one for patients with other skull base meningiomas.
术后MCA分支血管痉挛是严重的并发症。出现迟发性神经功能衰退时，需即使考虑到该并发症的可能。	Postoperative vasospasm of the MCA branches is a significant risk and should be timely considered in the differential diagnosis of delayed postoperative neurologic decline.
需进一步行CT血管造影检查。	Imaging using a CT angiogram is warranted.
· 硬膜外充分切除蝶骨翼和床突，可以在手术早期离断肿瘤血供，并起到视神经减压的作用。	A thorough extradural sphenoid wing resection and clinoidectomy leads to an opportunity to devascularize the tumor and decompress the optic nerve early in the procedure.
· 早期离断肿瘤血供可以减少显微手术关键步骤时的出血，保持术野清晰。	Early tumor devascularization minimizes bleeding during the demanding microsurgical steps of the operation and keeps the operative field pristine.
避免在内侧的神经血管结构周围使用双极电凝。	Avoidance of bipolar coagulation around the medial neurovascular structures is lifesaving.
· 关键的神经血管结构位于包膜内侧，因此是手术的盲区。	The critical neurovascular structures are along the medial capsule and therefore within the blind spot of the surgeon.
瘤内减压，仔细地分离肿瘤包膜，是避免术后并发症的重要手段。	Central tumor debulking and careful mobilization of the tumor capsule are key maneuvers to avoiding complications.
· 所有血管在处理过程中应最大限度地予以保留，可残留一薄层肿瘤组织。	All vessels should be treated with utmost respect and a small sheet of adherent tumor must be left behind.
颅底部的ICA穿支血管是非常重要，无可替代的。	The perforators along the ICA at the skull base are nonforgiving.
天幕脑膜瘤	Tentorial Meningioma
起源于天幕的脑膜瘤约占所有颅内脑膜瘤的3%-6%，其中30%的天幕脑膜瘤位于后颅窝。	Meningiomas originating from the tentorium cerebelli account for about 3% to 6% of all intracranial meningiomas and about 30% of the meningiomas found in the posterior fossa.
像其它部位的颅内脑膜瘤一样，天幕脑膜瘤主要发生于中年女性。	Like other meningiomas, these tumors are most common among middle-aged women.
天幕脑膜瘤可起源于天幕的任何部位，约一半左右起源于横窦区域，1/4起源于天幕游离缘，另外1/4起源于天幕和大脑镰交汇区域并对两者都有侵犯。	They can originate anywhere on the tentorium, with about half occurring laterally along the transverse sinus, one-quarter along the medial or free edge of the tentorium, and the remaining one-quarter split primarily between tumors of the central portion of the tentorium and those involving both the tentorium and the falx.
有很少一部分肿瘤起源于窦汇附近，并同时压迫包绕窦汇。	A very small proportion of these tumors are peritorcular, encompassing the torcula herophili.
很多学者按照不同的原则将天幕脑膜瘤分为不同类型。但与手术关联最密切的分类方法是由著名神经外科医生Yasargil提出。这种分类方法主要依据于脑膜瘤在天幕上的位置而进行分类。	Tentorial meningiomas have been classified in a number of ways by different colleagues, but Yasargil’s system, the most relevant for surgical planning, classifies meningiomas by location along the tentorium.
Yasargil将天幕分为“三环”。“内环”指的是天幕游离缘，“外环”指环绕横窦的天幕区域，在这两环之间的是“中环”区域。	Yasargil noted anatomic differences among what he described as the “three rings of the tentorium”: the inner ring or free edge, the outer ring along the transverse sinus, and the middle ring located between the other two rings.
天幕脑膜瘤还可根据肿瘤凸向幕上，幕下抑或同时侵及幕上下而进一步分类。	Tentorial meningiomas may be further classified depending on whether they project into the supratentorial space, infratentorial space, or both.
这一章主要涉及天幕游离缘的脑膜瘤。	This chapter is concerned with medial tentorial meningiomas that involve the inner ring of the tentorium.
临床表现	Clinical Presentation
由于天幕脑膜瘤生长缓慢，患者常没有任何症状以至于肿瘤体积很大时才被发现。	The slow growth of tentorial meningiomas contributes to their typically insidious clinical course, which often allows these tumors to grow quite large before diagnosis.
天幕脑膜瘤可出现多种不同的临床表现，不同的临床表现主要取决于肿瘤的大小、位置、水肿范围以及肿瘤凸向幕上还是幕下区域。	Medial tentorial meningiomas may present with a variety of clinical signs and symptoms, depending on their size, exact location, scope of edema, and whether they project into the supratentorial or infratentorial spaces.
天幕肿瘤可对脑干、颅神经（常见III, VI, V）、颞叶内侧或小脑产生压迫效应。	These tumors can exert mass effect on the brainstem, cranial nerves (CNs)(most often CNs III, VI, V), medial temporal lobe, and cerebellum.
最常见的临床症状是头痛、行走不稳和视力障碍（包括视野缺损和复视），精神状态改变和癫痫也非常常见。	The most common presenting symptoms are headache and gait disturbance. Visual disturbances (including diplopia and field deficits), mental status changes, and seizures are also common.
其他症状包括偏瘫、三叉神经痛及吞咽困难也曾有作者报道。	Other reported symptoms are hemiparesis, trigeminal neuralgia, and dysphagia.
磁共振可以清楚地显示肿瘤的大小、形状、幕上下的累及范围、天幕的肿瘤基底范围以及与周围神经和血管组织的关系。	Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging elucidates the tumor’s size, shape, projection into the supratentorial or infratentorial spaces, the location of tentorial attachment, and relationship to the adjacent neural and vascular structures.
T2序列上的血管流空影可以显示出肿瘤与后循环动脉的关系。	Flow voids best seen on T2 sequences establish the tumor’s relationship to the arteries of the posterior circulation.
脑实质水肿高度提示肿瘤已经突破软脑膜，磁共振的动脉和静脉显影会显示出血管的分布和走行。	Parenchymal edema is highly suggestive of pial invasion.
磁共振静脉显影可以显示出Galen静脉、直窦和相关的基底静脉。	Magnetic resonance angiogram and venogram determine the patterns of vascular displacement and encasement.
横窦和乙状窦的走行及与肿瘤的关系对于“外环”区域肿瘤非常重要。	The venogram evaluates the patency of the vein of Galen, straight sinus, and associated deep diencephalic veins.
已经被肿瘤完全侵蚀的静脉窦腔由于无血流通过可以直接切除而不会造成大量出血，但若静脉窦腔尚未被肿瘤完全侵蚀，则只能保留静脉窦而对肿瘤进行部分切除。	The patency of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses is studied for lateral tentorial tumors. Occluded venous sinuses may be resected, but those that are partially patent are preserved at the expense of radical subtotal tumor removal.
目前介入导管造影已经被CTA等无创的血管造影成像技术所代替。	Catheter angiography is unnecessary because it has been replaced by noninvasive vascular imaging modalities, including computed tomography (CT) angiogram.
对于天幕脑膜瘤一般不需要术前栓塞，因为肿瘤的血供来源于脑膜垂体干的天幕支（Bernasconi-Cassinari动脉），下外侧干的幕缘动脉分支，小脑上动脉的天幕分支和大脑后动脉的部分分支。	Preoperative embolization is not a consideration because the artery of Bernasconi and Cassinari of the meningohypophyseal trunk, the marginal tentorial branch of the inferolateral trunk, and the tentorial branches of the superior cerebellar and posterior cerebral arteries supply the tentorium.
这些血管由于血管纤细且走行弯曲使得造影的导管非常难于进入。即时栓塞成功，益处也不大。	These small vessels are difficult to cannulate, and their embolization offers little advantage when it is successful.
因为天幕肿瘤很少引起骨质侵蚀或增生，所以一般也不需要进行术前颅骨CT扫描。	CT scan is usually unnecessary because tentorial tumors rarely cause hyperostosis or bone erosion.
在术前的影像上要彻底区分中线区域天幕脑膜瘤和岩斜区脑膜瘤非常困难。	It may be difficult to distinguish between medial tentorial and petroclival meningiomas on preoperative imaging.
岩斜区脑膜瘤起源于三叉神经内侧的基底池内，而中线的天幕脑膜瘤一般位于三叉神经外侧并与周围神经血管结构通过一层蛛网膜相互分开。	Petroclival meningiomas originate medial to CN V within the arachnoid bands of the basal cisterns, whereas medial tentorial meningiomas are based lateral to CN V and own a preserved arachnoid layer separating them from the surrounding neurovascular structures.
全切岩斜区脑膜瘤的可能性远低于中线天幕脑膜瘤。	As a result, it is less likely that the surgeon will achieve gross total resection of a petroclival meningioma than a medial tentorial meningioma.
术前如果可以准确判断肿瘤类型且明白这些原则对于手术计划的制定非常重要。	This information is useful for preoperative planning and consultation with the patient.
图1. 图示天幕脑膜瘤。	Figure 1: A medial tentorial meningioma is shown.
术者通过经天幕小脑上入路来避免术中由于暴露不够而对颞叶的切除。	I approached this tumor via the supracerebellar transtentorial approach to avoid the risks of retraction on the dominant temporal lobe.
图2. 天幕脑膜瘤。如上图所示病例，肿瘤可以沿天幕表面扩展。	Figure 2: Tentorial meningiomas, such as this one, may extend along the entire surface of the tentorium.
在此患者中，后颅窝的占位压迫导致相应症状。	In this patient, the posterior fossa component led to compressive symptoms.
此病例分期分别通过乳突后和颞下入路两步来切除。	The tumor was removed through a two-stage operation via retromastoid and subtemporal craniotomies.
手术指证	Indications for the Procedure
如肿瘤体积小且无症状、或者症状轻微但手术风险高的肿瘤都可以影像学随访观察。	Small asymptomatic lesions or minimally symptomatic lesions in medically high-risk patients may be observed with serial imaging.
在出现症状的肿瘤患者或随访发现肿瘤体积明显增大时需要手术治疗。	Symptomatic lesions or lesions with documented growth on imaging deserve surgical treatment.
尽管第一次手术是最好的全切肿瘤的机会，但要注意的是手术应尽可能保留术前正常功能、改善占位造成的症状，在此基础上再争取尽量切除肿瘤且不造成副损伤。	Although the best opportunity for this type of resection is during the first operation, the overall goal of surgery is maximal tumor removal with maintenance of preoperative neurologic function and improvement of any existing deficit that is caused by mass effect of the tumor.
如果肿瘤对幕上脑组织有占位效应或侵蚀软脑膜造成脑白质组织水肿，术者推荐进行预防性抗癫痫治疗。	If the tumor exerts supratentorial mass effect on the brain or there is evidence of pial invasion and edema, I recommend seizure prophylaxis.
术前放置腰大池引流有利于术中脑组织塌陷。	A lumbar drain is placed for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage and intraoperative relaxation of the intracranial tension or cerebellum.
尤其在年轻患者中，这一操作可以明显增加暴露空间。	This is an important step because this maneuver increases the dimensions of the operative corridor, particularly for younger patients.
部分患者可用术中CT血管造影来定位有可能造成天幕切开困难的粗大天幕引流静脉。	In select patients, intraoperative CT angiogram may be used to locate large tentorial veins that can complicate tentorial sectioning.
如果采用颞下入路处理天幕外侧脑膜瘤时，Labbe静脉的位置非常重要。	If the subtemporal approach is considered for lateral tentorial lesions, the location of the vein of Labbe is an important consideration.
同样地，腰大池引流对松弛颞叶也非常重要。	Similarly, lumbar CSF drainage plays an important role for temporal lobe relaxation.
天幕的游离缘（天幕 “内环”）围绕脑干，并且与动眼神经、滑车神经、深部的静脉系统以及后循环血管关系都非常密切。	The inner ring of the tentorium (the tentorial incisura) surrounds the brainstem and is closely related to CNs III and IV, the deep venous system, and the posterior circulation.
图3. 天幕结构上面观，左侧天幕被切除以显示幕下结构（上排），天幕侧面观以及其浅部的解剖标志在图中被标识出（下排）。	Figure 3: Superior view of the tentorium cerebelli with the left half removed to show the infratentorial structures (top row of images). Lateral view of the tentorium and the superficial anatomic landmarks are indicated (lower row).
注意天幕在侧面的陡峭角度，颞下入路时需显著牵拉颞叶才能暴露达到天幕游离缘（图片引用自AL Rhoton, Jr）。	Note the steep angle of the tentorium and the required extensive temporal lobe retraction to reach the medial edge via the subtemporal route (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4. 因为抬高颞叶会导致Labbe静脉和其余颞部回流静脉受损，因此通过颞下入路进入天幕游离缘有风险（上排）。	Figure 4: The subtemporal route toward the medial tentorium can be problematic because the temporal lobe elevation places the vein of Labbe and other temporal bridging veins at risk (upper row).
天幕游离缘的神经血管结构已在图中标出（下排）（图片引用自AL Rhoton, Jr）。	The neurovascular anatomy at the tentorial incisura is summarized (lower row)(images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
天幕的血供主要来源于脑膜垂体干的天幕支（Bernasconi-Cassinari动脉），颈内动脉海绵窦段下外侧干的幕缘动脉以及小脑上动脉和小脑后动脉的天幕分支。	The tentorium receives its vascular supply from the basal tentorial artery (artery of Bernasconi-Cassinari) arising from the meningohypophyseal trunk, the marginal tentorial artery originating from the inferolateral trunk of the intracavernous carotid, and tentorial branches stemming from the superior cerebellar and posterior cerebral arteries.
这些血管都是天幕肿瘤血液供应的主要来源。	These vessels are the primary feeding vessels to tentorial meningiomas.
天幕拥有数目多变的静脉湖和走行各异的静脉窦，由于天幕脑膜瘤压迫横窦和乙状窦，造成引流不畅，这些静脉窦和静脉湖可变得异常发达。	The tentorium harbors variable numbers and patterns of venous lakes and sinuses. These sinuses may be functionally prominent in the presence of atrophic or compromised transverse and sigmoid sinuses (caused by lateral tentorial meningiomas).
在经天幕入路切开天幕过程中，可能会发生汹涌的静脉出血，此时的静脉出血可以通过明胶海绵压迫来控制。	Torrential venous bleeding may occur during transection of the tentorium via the transtentorial approach. This bleeding is readily controlled using Gelfoam packing.
如果采用双极电凝反而会导致裂口增大，无法达到止血效果。	Bipolar coagulation worsens the bleeding by shrinking the tentorial leaflets and expanding the tear.
至今为止，笔者从来没有遇到由于阻断天幕静脉湖血流而产生并发症的情况。	I have never witnessed an unwanted effect from occlusion of tentorial venous lakes of sinuses.
切除天幕肿瘤	RESECTION OF TENTORIAL MENINGIOMA
天幕肿瘤的采用何种手术入路取决于肿瘤的位置、尺寸、血供情况以及肿瘤凸向幕上、幕下还是两者皆有。	The best operative approach for any specific tentorial meningioma depends on the tumor’s location, dimensions, texture, the extent of vascular encasement, and whether it projects into the supratentorial or infratentorial space or both.
患者本身的神经血管解剖结构也会影响手术入路。	The patient’s neurovascular anatomy may also affect the choice of the operative trajectory.
对于局限于中线部位且凸向后颅窝的天幕脑膜瘤，经中线幕下小脑上入路可以切除病变。	For medial tentorial meningiomas confined to the midline and projecting into the posterior fossa, the midline supracerebellar infratentorial approach is effective.
天幕内环（游离缘）、中环和外环的脑膜瘤一般都可通过颞下入路来进行切除，而肿瘤的幕下部分可以通过乙状窦后入路来处理。	Medial, middle, and lateral supratentorial meningiomas are most commonly reached via a subtemporal craniotomy, whereas their infratentorial counterparts in lateral locations are exposed through the retrosigmoid trajectory.
一些非传统的手术入路也经常会用于天幕脑膜瘤的处理。	A variety of nontraditional approaches are also described for tentorial meningiomas.
对于幕上的肿瘤，可采用经枕半球间入路。	For supratentorial tumors, the bioccipital interhemispheric approach has been used.
跨幕上下的肿瘤可以通过经枕经天幕入路或幕上下联合入路来切除，而体积巨大的跨天幕肿瘤幕上和幕下部分采用分期处理也是合理的。	Tumors spanning both the supratentorial and infratentorial compartments may be resected via the occipital transtentorial or combined bioccipital/suboccipital approaches. Staged supratentorial and infratentorial craniotomies are reasonable for giant tumors.
不管肿瘤凸向幕上、幕下还是均有涉及，笔者都更倾向于采用微创的中线旁幕下小脑上经天幕入路来切除绝大多数中线部位的天幕脑膜瘤。	I prefer to use the minimally disruptive paramedian supracerebellar infratentorial transtentorial approach for the majority of medial tentorial meningiomas, whether they project superiorly, inferiorly, or both.
如果操作合适，这个入路可以看到肿瘤的全貌，甚至可以看到向对侧生长的肿瘤。	When performed properly, this corridor creates a panoramic corridor to all components of the tumor, even toward the portion of the lesion extending contralaterally.
下面将详细描述这一入路。	This approach is detailed below.
对于手术的暴露开颅等颅外操作部分，请参考《经天幕入路切除海马旁肿瘤》章节。	Please refer to the Transtentorial Approach to Parahippocampal Lesions chapter for the initial steps of the operation, including the exposure.
经天幕入路切除中线部位起源于天幕的幕上脑膜瘤的硬膜内操作部分详述如下。	The transtentorial route for a purely supratentorial medial tentorial meningioma is described below.
图5. 在小脑上入路的手术中，为了增加暴露有可能要切断中线旁引流静脉（上排）。	Figure 5: A parasagittal bridging vein may be disconnected for expansion of the supracerebellar corridor (top illustration).
图中展示的是肿瘤浸润的天幕（箭头）（下排）。	The tumor-infiltrated tentorium (arrow) is exposed (bottom photo).
图6. 在切开天幕接近肿瘤的过程中，可通过锐性分离蛛网膜来充分暴露天幕游离缘的神经血管结构，早期的充分暴露能够避免在肿瘤切除过程中受到损伤。	Figure 6: Before the tumor is approached via the tentorial incisions, the neurovascular contents at the incisura are identified via generous arachnoid dissection. Their early exposure can keep them out of harm’s way during the later stages of tumor dissection.
充分锐性分离瘤旁的蛛网膜带会避免损伤滑车神经。	Sharp dissection of the arachnoid bands over the part of the tumor that hangs over the incisura prevents injury to CN IV.
图7.识别天幕游离缘旁的滑车神经。	Figure 7: CN IV is identified near the edge of the tentorium.
将位于天幕缘旁的滑车神经及周围血管结构充分游离并保护起来，如果可行，先将这部分肿瘤减容。	This nerve and the surrounding vascular structures are dissected free. This portion of the tumor may be reduced, if feasible.
天幕游离缘附近的脑干背外侧神经神经血管结构要在大规模切除肿瘤之前充分暴露，以免切除过程中由于视野不清误伤。	Early exposure of the dorsolateral brainstem and surrounding neurovascular structures at the tentorial incisura allows for their protection by microdissection away from the tumor before significant tumor debulking is undertaken and the surgical field is obscured by bleeding.
图8. 天幕表面可用双极电凝进行处理，这一操作可阻断肿瘤血供，减少肿瘤切除过程中的出血。	Figure 8: The undersurface of the tentorium is coagulated using bipolar electrocautery. This maneuver devascularizes the tumor and facilitates resection by reducing blood loss and improving the surgeon’s visualization.
图9. 在切除天幕游离缘的时候要注意保护滑车神经（上方插图）。	Figure 9: The trochlear nerve must be protected along the lateral edge of the incisura during tentorial transection (upper inset image).
若要沿着红色虚线切除将会损伤神经，而沿着黑色虚线则利于神经保护。	Incision along the red hashed line will sacrifice the nerve; incision along the black hashed line is appropriate.
另外，颞叶后方基底部的脑实质肿瘤需要T形切口切开天幕。	Alternatively, a T-shaped incision may be made within the tentorium for intraparenchymal lesions within the posterior basal temporal lobe.
切除左侧岩骨天幕区域脑膜瘤的术中图片证实了滑车神经在肿瘤和天幕前缘进入硬模（下图）。	An intraoperative photograph during resection of a left-sided petrotentorial meningioma demonstrates the location of the nerve as it enters the dura at the anterior edge of the coagulated tumor and tentorium (lower image).
图10. 在充分保护滑车神经的情况下，天幕切口可从岩骨边缘延伸直到中线以包含肿瘤基底区域。	Figure 10: A generous section of the tentorium that contains the base of the tumor and spans the petrous ridge to the midline is incised while the operator identifies and preserves the trochlear nerve along the entire anterior edge of the tentorium.
在少数情况下，如术中发现汇入天幕的枕叶引流静脉阻挡视野，可将其牺牲。	Occasional bridging veins draining the occipital lobe and entering the superior aspect of the tentorium may be sacrificed.
沿中线切开天幕时必须注意保护直窦以及其分支。	The medial tentorial cut should preserve the straight sinus and its tributaries.
天幕有可能存在静脉湖，而天幕的静脉出血可以通过浸泡凝血脢的明胶海绵压迫止血。	Venous lakes may be present, and venous bleeding through the leaflets of the tentorium should be controlled using thrombin-soaked Gelfoam packing.
而双极电凝则会皱缩天幕，扩大裂口而加重出血。	Bipolar cauterization will exacerbate the bleeding by shrinking and tearing the tentorial edges.
像上图所示的方式靠近肿瘤并切开天幕将会有助于减少肿瘤血供，并提供一个相对无血的区域来切除和分离肿瘤。	Sectioning of the tentorium as described above will further devascularize the tumor and furnish a relatively bloodless field to debulk the tumor and microsurgically mobilize it from the surrounding cortex.
图11. 在切开天幕暴露肿瘤后，可通过吸引器和双极电凝来对质软肿瘤行内减压，而对纤维性质地坚硬的肿瘤则可通过吸引器和CUSA（超声吸引器）配合来进行切除。	Figure 11: Following division of the tentorium, the tumor is internally debulked using the suction device, along with coagulation for soft tumors or the ultrasonic aspirator for fibrous tumors.
但在内减压肿瘤过程中不应在视线不及的瘤壁外侧操作。	The process of intracapsular enucleation should not inadvertently violate the tumor capsule within the operative blind spot.
图12. 在对肿瘤进行足够的内减压后，再分离瘤壁与周围如枕叶底部和颞叶后部等神经血管组织，在这分离过程中注意保护大脑后动脉。	Figure 12: After the tumor is sufficiently debulked, the tumor capsule is dissected from the surrounding structures, including the posterior basal temporal and the basal occipital lobes. The en passage posterior cerebral artery branches are preserved.
图13. 小块的脑棉垫片用来逐渐垫开肿瘤与瘤周组织。	Figure 13: Small cottonoid patties are used to mobilize the tumor away from the areas where the pia is disrupted.
这一操作与处理凸面脑膜瘤类似。	This maneuver is similar to that used for convexity meningiomas.
经天幕入路本质上是将一个中线区域的天幕脑膜瘤变为凸面脑膜瘤。	The transtentorial route essentially transforms the medial tentorial tumor into a mass situated over the lateral convexity of the cerebrum.
图14. 经天幕入路创造了一条直接到达枕叶底部和颞叶后方的通道。	Figure 14: The transtentorial route creates a wide corridor to the basal occipital and posteromedial basal temporal regions.
如果切除肿瘤和侵蚀的天幕可以达到Simpson I级切除，这会使得肿瘤复发率很低。	Removal of the tumor and the affected tentorium ensures a Simpson grade 1 resection with a favorable low recurrence rate.
在这一区域的轴内肿瘤（intra-axial tumor）也可通过这一入路切除。	An intraaxial tumor in this region may be similarly resected.
图15. 内镜可以在切除肿瘤时显微镜视线不及的地方进一步探查和继续切除，尤其是大脑镰后方和直窦附近的区域。	Figure 15: Endoscopy may be used to investigate the resection cavity and ensure gross total removal of the tumor within the operative blind spot, especially medial to the posterior falx and around the straight sinus.
岩尖部也可以通过有角度的内镜来进一步探查。	The region over the petrous apex is also thoroughly inspected using angled endoscopes.
切开的天幕不需要重建，但硬膜要水密缝合。	The resected portion of the tentorium is not reconstructed. The dura is closed in a watertight fashion.
术中腰椎穿刺脑脊液引流在手术结束后可拔除。	The lumbar drain catheter is removed at the end of the procedure.
术后患者要送入重症监护室严密观察。	Patients are typically observed in the intensive care unit overnight.
术后一周内逐渐减少类固醇剂量，减少的速度及剂量取决于脑组织的肿胀程度和患者的神经功能状态。	The steroid dosage is tapered off within 1 week, depending on the extent of cerebral edema and the patient’s neurologic status.
术后48小时内复查磁共振以观察肿瘤切除程度，并作为今后随访比较的依据。	Follow-up MR imaging is obtained within 48 hours of surgery as a baseline for future comparison to detect tumor recurrence.
术后影像资料可以指导术者回顾手术过程，在以后对此类肿瘤做到更完善的切除。	The findings on the imaging can be an important source of learning for the surgeon to direct more effective resection for the future patients.
· 相比于其他应用更广泛的手术入路，经天幕小脑上入路具有多个优点，但是入路深在和工作区域窄小是这一入路的缺点。	Compared with other more commonly used approaches, the supracerebellar transtentorial corridor provides numerous advantages, but it is associated with long and narrow working distances.
· 在深在而窄小的区域切除血管型的天幕脑膜瘤时术者的经验和专业素养显得尤其重要。	Expertise in operating within deep and narrow operative corridors is necessary for managing vascular meningiomas via the transtentorial approach.
动静脉畸形切除手术的操作技巧	Cavernous Sinus Meningioma
累及海绵窦的脑膜瘤（meningiomas involving the cavernous sinus）可起源于海绵窦内，也可继发于从其他部位起源并侵犯至海绵窦者，且后者更为常见。	Meningiomas involving the cavernous sinus can originate from within the sinus or more typically invade the venous sinus secondarily from other points of origin.
这些继发性肿瘤的起源通常包括颞骨岩部、斜坡、床突或蝶骨小翼。	These secondary tumors commonly originate from the petrous temporal bone, clivus, clinoid processes, or the lesser wing of the sphenoid.
海绵窦脑膜瘤占颅内脑膜瘤的比例虽小，但由于其深居于海绵窦内，手术极具挑战。	Meningiomas of the cavernous sinus make up a very small percentage of all cranial meningiomas, but their location within the cavernous sinus makes their surgical resection most challenging.
即便是否应行外科干预这样的基本问题，目前仍存在争议。	Controversy exists regarding whether surgical intervention for these lesions should even be attempted.
其缘由部分归结于对海绵窦手术的不熟悉。	This is partially because there is some degree of unfamiliarity with intracavernous surgery and its possibilities.
海绵窦历来被认为是“手术禁区”，因为在该区域操作常可损伤多束颅神经、海绵窦段颈内动脉及其分支、以及伴行于动脉的交感神经丛，从而导致术后多种并发症。	Historically, the cavernous sinus has been considered a surgical “no man's land” because dissection within its confines often resulted in neurologic morbidity from injury to multiple cranial nerves (CNs), the cavernous internal carotid artery (ICA) or its branches, or this artery's accompanying sympathetic plexus.
然而，随着显微神经外科技术及海绵窦相关解剖知识的进展，上述手术风险已经显著下降。	However, as microneurosurgical techniques and knowledge of the cavernous sinus anatomy improved, morbidity from surgical resection of these lesions has significantly decreased.
当然，这也与对手术适应症的日趋完善密不可分。	This improvement is also a result of more refined indications for surgical intervention.
海绵窦脑膜瘤的临床症状主要来自于肿瘤对海绵窦内各神经血管结构的占位效应。	The presenting symptoms of patients with cavernous sinus meningiomas emanate from the mass effect exerted by the tumor on the neurovascular structures housed within the sinus.
典型表现有头痛，静脉回流受阻引起的突眼，面部疼痛或麻木，以及视力视野障碍如复视、瞳孔不等大、上睑下垂及视野缺损等。	Patients with these tumors typically present with headaches, proptosis due to obstruction of venous outflow, facial pain or numbness, and visual disturbances such as diplopia, anisocoria, ptosis, or scotoma.
少见情况包括各种颈内动脉受压狭窄引发的症状。	Less frequently, they may present with symptoms of carotid stenosis due to mass effect on the ICA.
例如短暂性脑缺血发作（TIAs）、一过性黑朦、脑血管意外（CVAs）等。	These syndromes include transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), amaurosis fugax, or cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs).
另一类少见症状，源自垂体或垂体柄受压引起的垂体功能障碍。	Another less frequent presentation includes pituitary dysfunction secondary to mass effect from the meningioma on the pituitary gland or stalk.
外科评估	Evaluation
外科评估始于详尽的病史，需特别注意涉及该区域的手术及放疗既往史。	The surgeon's evaluation begins with a thorough history, including specific questions about previous surgery or radiation therapy to the area.
另外既往是否有炎症性（如结节病）或转移性病变既往史也是一个需要关注的重要问题，此类疾病可累及硬膜而表现出类似于脑膜瘤的影像特征。	It is also important to question about involvement of any inflammatory (i.e., sarcoid) and metastatic systemic disease processes with dural involvement that could mimic meningioma on imaging.
非肿瘤性病变可与海绵窦脑膜瘤高度相似，术前需充分评估并将其鉴别对手术方案的制定可能起到重大影响。	Nontumorous lesions can readily mimic meningiomas in the cavernous sinus, and their consideration in the differential diagnoses list can have a significant impact on the preoperative workup and ultimately the surgical decision-making process.
神经系统查体需特别关注第II到第VI对颅神经。	Physical and neurologic exams are performed with particular attention to CNs II-VI.
常规视野检查以明确有无孤立性视野缺损。	This evaluation should also include formal visual field testing to rule out isolated scotomas.
根据临床或影像学表现，如存在下丘脑或漏斗部受压表现时，需行垂体内分泌功能检查。	A pituitary endocrine evaluation is necessary, including a complete laboratory investigation as is indicated by clinical or radiographic findings, such as mass effect on the hypothalamus or infundibulum.
通过MRI可分析海绵窦区复杂的解剖关系，评估肿瘤的起源、海绵窦的累及程度、与视神经和视神经管的关系。	A MR imaging study analyzes the complex anatomy of the cavernous sinus region. I approximate the origin of the tumor, its degree of cavernous sinus involvement, and abutment of the optic nerve and canal.
MRA和CTA可评估颈内动脉管径。	MR and CT angiography allow evaluation of the ICA caliber.
管径狭窄即提示肿瘤侵犯管壁的可能，此时只能作次全切除，并应避免术中对颈内动脉的过度操作。	Any stenosis of the artery implies that the wall of the artery is infiltrated by the tumor and subtotal resection is indicated; the artery should not be manipulated during surgery.
既往有海绵窦放射治疗病史者，其术中动脉损伤的风险也显著增加。	Any history of radiation to the cavernous sinus also significantly increases the risk of arterial injury during surgery.
一些学者主张对于既往有海绵窦手术或放疗史，或预计术中海绵窦段颈内动脉破裂风险较高的患者，进行传统血管造影并行球囊闭塞试验。	Some of my colleagues advocate for conventional angiography with a balloon test occlusion for patients who have a history of cavernous sinus surgery or radiation or for whom there is significant concern of intraoperative cavernous ICA injury.
如果证实侧支循环代偿较差，则建议在制定手术方案时，就做好可能行高流量搭桥的准备。	If poor collateral circulation is demonstrated, they recommend preparation for a high-flow bypass as part of the surgical plan.
关于此项技术，请参阅《高流量血管重建》一章。	For more information on this procedure, see the High-Flow Revascularization chapter.
笔者的理念则不同于上述观点。	My personal philosophy differs with this recommendation.
我并不主张将血管重建术用于全切已侵犯颈内动脉的肿瘤。	I do not recommend the use of revascularization to facilitate resection of the infiltrated ICA with the goal of gross total tumor resection.
放射外科对于处理术后海绵窦内小到中等体积的残留肿瘤，是一种可靠的手段。	Radiosurgery provides a reliable method for control of small and medium-size residual intracavernous tumors.
图1：一例较小的左侧海绵窦脑膜瘤。	Figure 1: A small left cavernous sinus meningioma is shown.
可见海绵窦段颈内动脉被肿瘤包裹并管腔狭窄（箭头），提示应避免对动脉的过度操作。	Note the encased and stenosed cavernous ICA (arrow), precluding aggressive dissection around the artery.
该占位向外推挤海绵窦外侧硬膜缘。	The mass has pushed the lateral dural margin of the cavernous sinus outward.
沿天幕游离缘可见明显的脑膜尾征。	A dural tail along the edge of the tentorium is also apparent.
治疗理念	Treatment Philosophy
脑膜瘤的治疗方案包括随访、手术切除和立体定向放射外科。	Treatment options for meningiomas include observation, surgical resection, and stereotactic radiosurgery.
大多数无症状性或仅有轻微症状的海绵窦脑膜瘤均采取了随访后放射外科治疗。	Most asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic cavernous sinus meningiomas are observed with serial imaging or undergo radiosurgical treatment.
一项对最近研究的综述证实，超过60%的患者，其肿瘤呈静止状态。	A review of current studies supports the finding that more than 60% of patients treated for these tumors harbor quiescent tumors.
对这些采取保守治疗的病例，推荐的影像学随访频率为至少每年一次。	The recommended follow-up interval for imaging the conservatively managed lesions is at least once a year.
肿瘤压迫视神经复合体导致任何程度的视力受损均可作为手术指征，因为手术一旦解除视神经受压情况，视力常可改善。	Tumors causing any degree of vision loss due to optic apparatus compression are surgical lesions because vision often improves once the mass effect on CN II is relieved.
随访证实的肿瘤增大或进行性神经功能缺失，也为手术指征。	Documented tumor growth or progressive neurologic deficits are indications for surgical intervention.
手术目的尚包括明确病理诊断，以助于后续治疗。	Surgical intervention also permits histopathologic diagnosis and grading, which guides future management.
术者须时刻谨记，首次手术的目的，安全排在第一位，近全切除是次要的。	When pursuing surgical intervention, the surgeon must be mindful that the goal is (primarily) safe and (secondarily) near gross total resection during the first operation.
二次手术则意味着神经血管损伤的高风险。	Reoperation for these lesions is associated with a high risk of neural and vascular injury.
正如上文所述，海绵窦脑膜瘤若已侵犯颈内动脉的血管外膜及颅神经的神经束膜，则极易导致术中颈内动脉及颅神经的损伤。	As previously described, cavernous sinus meningiomas carry a high risk of ICA and intracavernous cranial nerve injury secondary to tumor infiltration of the ICA adventitia and CN perineurium.
因此，对肿瘤的切除应做到适可而止以避免上述损伤。	To prevent injury to these structures, some tumor should be left behind.
海绵窦脑膜瘤的切除，应将重点放在安全切除附于海绵窦外侧壁上的窦外部肿瘤。	Removal of the cavernous sinus meningiomas should focus on safe removal of the extracavernous tumor on the lateral wall of the sinus.
笔者不会对窦内部的肿瘤行激进的切除，尤其当海绵窦段颈内动脉受包裹（Hirsch2级、3级）以及术前并未出现颅神经功能障碍时。	I do not attempt aggressive intracavernous tumor resection, particularly in cases where the cavernous ICA is encased (Hirsch grades 2 and 3) and preoperative CN deficits are not present.
对残余的肿瘤可进行随访观察（笔者偏向于此）或立体定向放射外科（SRS）治疗。	The residual tumor can be observed (my preference) or treated with stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS).
有计划的次全切除联合术后SRS的方案，目前已越来越多地被同行认可。	Increasingly, the combination of planned subtotal resection with SRS is being established as an acceptable paradigm.
然而，还是有为数不多的报道认为SRS可加重远期复发患者的病情。	However, there are limited reports of SRS potentially causing a more aggressive course in patients with late recurrence.
其他研究表明，切除海绵窦外肿瘤而对窦内部分采取保守的方案，其20年复发率为20%。	Other studies have shown a recurrence rate of 20% at 20 years following extracavernous resection and conservative intracavernous paradigm.
这些结果反映了保守方案对残余肿瘤的效果。	These results suggest the potential efficacy of observation for the residual tumor.
尽管对于海绵窦脑膜瘤最佳治疗方案尚无共识，但笔者主张更为保守的手术切除加术后密切影像学随访的策略，对复发的肿瘤则选用放射外科治疗。	Although no consensus exists regarding the best course of action for cavernous sinus meningiomas, I advocate a more conservative surgical strategy with serial imaging to follow residual tumors and radiosurgery in the event of regrowth and recurrence.
海绵窦的显微外科解剖十分复杂，因此必须在实验室内进行详尽的学习。	The microsurgical anatomy of the cavernous sinus is complex and requires an in-depth study in the laboratory.
在真正进行手术操作之前，必须通过阅读图谱和尸头解剖来充分掌握此区域的三维解剖知识。	Intimate anatomic knowledge should be translated from this Atlas to three-dimensional concepts in the cadaver laboratory before its application in the operating room.
图2：逐层分步解剖右侧海绵窦。海绵窦外侧壁内走行有动眼神经、滑车神经、三叉神经眼支和上颌支（Rhoton教授原图认为上颌支位于海绵窦以外，译者注），外展神经则紧贴颈内动脉行于海绵窦内部（左上图）。	Figure 2: The relevant anatomy is demonstrated through progressive, layered, and stepwise extradural dissection of the right cavernous sinus. The lateral wall of the cavernous sinus houses CNs III, IV, V1, and V2, with CN VI passing through the sinus itself by the ICA (left upper photo).
剥开覆盖颞叶的外层脑膜层（即海绵窦外侧壁的外层，译者注），可见动眼神经和滑车神经进入海绵窦顶壁，并前行进入眶上裂（右上图）。	The outer layer of the temporal lobe dura has been peeled away from the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, exposing CNs III and IVentering the roof of the cavernous sinus and passing forward through the superior orbital fissure (right upper photo).
动眼神经在海绵窦顶壁行于一小段蛛网膜池中（红色箭头），直至前床突下缘时才进入海绵窦侧壁（黄色箭头，左中图）。	CN III enters a short cistern in the sinus roof (red arrow) and does not become incorporated into the lateral wall until it reaches the lower margin of the anterior clinoid process (yellow arrow, left middle image).
剥除海绵窦外侧壁的残余硬膜（外侧壁的内层，译者注）（右中图）。	The remaining dura covering the lateral wall has also been removed (right middle image).
三叉神经后根已被翻向前方，以显露海绵窦下界的后部（黄色箭头），位于岩尖三叉神经压迹的内侧（左下图）。	The posterior trigeminal root has been reflected forward to expose the posterior part of the lower margin of the cavernous sinus (yellow arrow) in the area medial to the trigeminal impression on the petrous apex (left lower photo).
向前翻开三叉神经主干及全部三分支，显露海绵窦的静脉间隙（右下图）。（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）	The trigeminal nerve and its three divisions have been reflected forward to expose the venous spaces of the cavernous sinus (right lower image). (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
颈内动脉及与之附着的交感神经丛穿行于海绵窦内，并发出脑膜垂体干和下外侧干，偶尔还有McConnell被囊动脉或原始三叉动脉。	The ICA, with its adherent sympathetic plexus, passes through the cavernous sinus and feeds the meningohypophyseal trunk, inferolateral trunk, and occasionally McConnell's capsular artery or a persistent trigeminal artery.
海绵窦脑膜瘤的Hirsh分级，基于影像学上海绵窦段颈内动脉的受累程度。	The Hirsch grading of cavernous sinus meningiomas classifies these lesions according to their degree of radiographic involvement of the cavernous segment of the ICA.
1级为肿瘤接触或部分包绕动脉。	Hirsch grade 1 lesions come in contact with or partially encase the cavernous ICA.
2-3级均为完全包裹动脉，其中2级尚无管腔狭窄，而3级则存在动脉狭窄的影像学征象。	Grades 2 and 3 lesions completely encase the ICA, with grade 2 lesions causing no radiographic narrowing of the ICA lumen and grade 3 lesions causing radiographic narrowing of the artery.
Hirsh分级可用来预测肿瘤的可切除程度。	The Hirsch grade serves as an important indicator of the resectability of the tumor.
1级预后最佳而3级预后最差，原因在于全切难度大而颈内动脉损伤风险高。	Grade 1 lesions carry the most favorable and grade 3 tumors the least favorable prognosis, due to the requirement for a more aggressive attempt at resection and the correlated higher risk of ICA injury.
在高风险的病例中，病理学研究已证实肿瘤可侵犯海绵窦段颈内动脉的外膜层，其蛛网膜间隙缺失。	This risk can be attributed to the pathologically verified invasion of the adventitia of the cavernous ICA, lacking an intervening arachnoid membrane.
其他病理学发现包括肿瘤侵犯颅神经的神经束膜，尤其是动眼神经，这使得在这些病例中，颅神经受损的风险很高。	Other pathologic studies have shown that meningiomas become continuous with the perineurium of CNs, particularly CN III, accounting for the high risk of injury during aggressive attempts at surgical resection.
图3：硬膜外入路行右侧海绵窦的手术学解剖。	Figure 3: Stepwise dissection of the right cavernous sinus from an operative perspective using the extradural approach is shown.
颞前-眶颧开颅及硬膜外前床突切除术已完成，眶上裂的外侧缘已显露（左上图，此时硬膜外前床突切除术其实尚未完成，译者注）。	The pretemporal orbitozygomatic craniotomy and extradural clinoidectomy are complete and the lateral edge of the superior orbital fissure exposed (left upper photo).
在眶上裂的外侧缘处切断额颞或脑膜眶硬膜返折，将海绵窦外侧壁的外层从内层上剥离。	The outer layer of the cavernous sinus was separated or peeled off from its inner layer after cutting the frontotemporal or meningo-orbital dural band at the lateral edge of the superior orbital fissure.
因此，掀开海绵窦外侧壁的外层（脑膜层），即可显露融入外侧壁内层的颅神经（右上图）。	The nerves invested in the inner layer of the lateral wall are thereby exposed as the meningeal (outer) layer is peeled away (right upper photo).
切断脑膜中动脉，继续向后内侧剥离硬膜，即可暴露岩浅大神经，其通常行于岩骨段颈内动脉上方，故可作为其定位标志。	After dividing the middle meningeal artery, the peeling continues posteriorly and medially while the greater petrosal nerve is exposed. This nerve usually travels above the petrous ICA and is a good landmark for the artery.
沿中颅窝剥离硬膜的内侧界为前岩床突硬膜返折，后界为岩骨嵴（左中图）。	The medial edge of the dural mobilization along the middle fossa is at the anterior petroclinoid dural fold, and the posterior edge is at the petrous ridge (left middle image).
床突旁区域的放大观（右中图）。	An enlarged view of the paraclinoid area is also included (right middle image).
注意，经Parkinson三角进入硬膜内是可能的。	Note that intradural entry is possible via the Parkinson's triangle.
进一步剥除海绵窦外侧壁的内层（左下图）。	Another view after the inner dural layer of the lateral sinus wall has been removed is shown (left lower photo).
病灶经外侧壁侵犯海绵窦的通道也即为手术进入海绵窦的径路。	The area where the lesion presents into the lateral wall is the point of operative entry.
此时可见以下中颅窝三角：前内侧三角（三叉神经眼支和上颌支之间）、前外侧三角（三叉神经上颌支和下颌支之间）、后外侧三角（即Glasscock三角，三叉神经下颌支和岩浅大神经之间）、后内侧三角（即Kawase三角，三叉神经下颌支外侧与岩浅大神经后方区域）。	The middle fossa triangles exposed are the anteromedial triangle (between V1 and V2); the anterolateral triangle (between V2 and V3); the posterolateral triangle, also called Glasscock's triangle (between V3 and the greater petrosal nerve); and the posteromedial triangle, also called the Kawase triangle (lateral to the trigeminal nerve and posterior to the greater petrosal nerve).
最后一图展示了去除中颅窝底和内听道顶壁部分骨质后的解剖（右下图）。（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）	Finally, another view illustrating some portions of the middle fossa floor and roof of the internal auditory canal after bone removed in the area is also included (right lower image). (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
图4：海绵窦区的硬膜内入路解剖。	Figure 4: Another dissection to illustrate similar principles from an intradural perspective is shown.
大型肿瘤应联合硬膜内及硬膜外入路。（感谢Rhoton教授对图片的授权）	Large tumors are best approached via both intra- and extradural corridors. (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
大多数海绵窦脑膜瘤的暴露最适合经眶颧开颅及硬膜外前床突切除术来实现。	Most cavernous sinus meningiomas are best approached via an orbitozygomatic craniotomy(OZ) and extradural clinoidectomy.
该入路灵活度大，可从多角度处理海绵窦，并可实现颈内动脉的近端及远端控制。	This approach is flexible and provides multiple working angles to the entire venous sinus, as well as proximal and distal control over the ICA.
扩大翼点开颅结合硬膜外前床突切除术也可处理大多数这一区域肿瘤（不适用于向上方和/或向中颅窝生长的肿瘤）。	The extended pterional craniotomy and extradural clinoidectomy is also as effective for most tumors (except in the cases of tumors with significant superior and/or middle fossa extension).
如上所述，开颅入路的选择，核心目标是能对海绵窦外部的肿瘤全切，而对其内部最外侧份的肿瘤行相对保守的切除。	As discussed above, the goal of the craniotomy is removal of all extracavernous components of the tumor and conservative excision of the tumor within the lateral-most aspect of the cavernous sinus.
如果术前存在颅神经功能障碍，则尽力行神经减压是合情合理的。	If preoperative CN deficits are present, an attempt at these nerves' decompression is justified.
术者应尽量使得手术操作空间最大化，这就需要在开颅中充分地去除骨质（即切除颞下骨质）。	The surgeon should maximize the operative working window by means of liberally removing bone during the approach (i.e., subtemporal craniectomy).
笔者偏向于通过腰大池引流松弛硬膜囊，以便于硬膜外操作。	I prefer to install a lumbar drain for cerebrospinal fluid drainage to relax the dural sac and facilitate extradural dissection.
术中需监测动眼、滑车和外展神经功能。	Cranial nerves III, IV, and VI are monitored during the operation.
对于侵及海绵窦后部的肿瘤，可通过经颧开颅或中颅窝/颞下开颅来实现海绵窦后部和岩尖的良好暴露，但对于颈内动脉的远端控制欠佳。	For meningiomas within the posterior cavernous sinus, the zygomatic craniotomy or middle fossa/subtemporal craniotomy offers favorable exposure of the posterior cavernous sinus and petrous apex, but suboptimal control over the distal ICA.
笔者并不认为卸颧弓可显著增加手术空间，因此该步骤并非必须的。	I do not believe the osteotomy of the zygomatic arch offers significant expanded working angles, and therefore it is superfluous.
眶颧开颅时，患者取仰卧位，头部向对侧旋转30°。	The orbitozygomatic osteotomy can be optimally performed with the patient in the supine position and head tilted 30 degrees toward the contralateral side.
颈部区域需做好颈内动脉近端控制的准备。	The patient's neck should be prepared to facilitate proximal carotid artery control.
掀起骨瓣后即可暴露眶内容物，肌电监测电极可直接置于上直肌、上斜肌、外直肌，以监测动眼、滑车、外展神经功能。	After the bone flap is elevated, the orbital contents are exposed and electromyographic electrodes are directly placed into the superior oblique, superior rectus, and lateral rectus muscles to monitor CNs III, IV, and VI.
图5：完成眶颧开颅、硬膜外前床突切除术后，进一步切除颞下骨质，即可直视中颅窝底。	Figure 5: After completion of the orbitozygomatic craniotomy and extradural clinoidectomy, a subtemporal craniectomy is completed so that a direct view of the middle fossa floor is available.
逐渐掀起中颅窝硬膜，可见三叉神经上颌支及下颌支的硬膜袖套包绕着神经穿经中颅底，将其与颞叶硬膜的外层（中颅窝硬膜的脑膜层，译者注）相分离。	The middle fossa dura is then peeled off. The dural sheaths investing V2 and V3 as they exit the floor of the middle fossa are identified and separated from the outer layer of temporal lobe dura.
该步骤即从硬膜外将海绵窦肿瘤的窦外部与窦内部相分离。	This maneuver allows the extracavernous component of the tumor to be separated from its intracavernous portion extradurally.
整个操作过程中，笔者也会尽量切除，或至少电凝灼烧所有受侵犯的硬膜，以减少潜在的复发位点。	Throughout the procedure, I also attempt removal, or at least cauterization, of any infiltrated dura in order to minimize the foci of potential recurrence.
颈内动脉的控制	Vascular Control of the ICA
对于受肿瘤侵犯的颈内动脉，需确保其周围全程（岩骨段、海绵窦段、床突段）均在控制之中，以避免难以预料的血管损伤，减少大量失血的可能。	I secure control of the ICA along its full extent (petrous, cavernous, and clinoidal segments) to approximate the location of the ICA engulfed by the artery, avoid inadvertent vascular injury, and minimize the risk of massive blood loss.
为此，在掀开中颅窝硬膜之后，可通过Glasscock三角显露岩骨段颈内动脉。	To achieve this goal, once elevation of the dura from the middle fossa is complete, the petrous segment of the ICA can be exposed through the Glasscock's triangle.
这一步骤仅在计划行大范围全切肿瘤的病例中实施。	This maneuver is indicated only if aggressive tumor resection is contemplated.
掀开硬膜时，脑膜中动脉需电凝后切断。	The middle meningeal artery is also coagulated and divided during elevation of the middle fossa dura.
辨认岩浅大神经是显露颈内动脉的第一步。将该神经切断后，用金刚钻磨除骨质，注意保持滴水。	Exposure of the ICA is accomplished by first identifying the greater superficial petrosal nerve (GSPN), dividing it, then drilling through the bone with a diamond bit while using copious irrigation.
该区域常有骨质缺如。	The bone is often dehiscent in this area.
应避免对岩浅大神经的牵拉，因为这样的操作为损伤膝状神经节而导致面瘫。	Traction on the GSPN is avoided to prevent injury to the geniculate ganglion; such injury can lead to facial palsy.
Glasscock三角的顶点为：面神经裂孔（facialhiatus，岩浅大神经从膝状神经节发出、从面神经管内穿至中颅底颞骨表面的裂孔，译者注）、卵圆孔前部、以及岩浅大神经与三叉神经下颌支外侧缘的交点。	The apices of the Glasscock triangle are the facial hiatus, the anterior aspect of the foramen ovale, and the intersection of the GSPN and the lateral aspect of the V3.
该三角深面即为颈内动脉所在，金刚钻磨除表面骨质即可将其显露，注意持续滴水。	This triangle overlies the carotid artery, and drilling within this triangle using a diamond bit and constant irrigation uncovers the carotid artery.
可用一枚临时阻断夹夹闭岩骨段颈内动脉以实现近端控制。	Proximal control is secured by placement of a temporary clip on the petrous ICA.
另一种更为常用的方法，则是在颈动脉管内置入一Fogarty球囊导管。	Alternatively, and more often, a Fogarty catheter is inserted into the carotid canal.
需要进行近端控制时，即可扩展球囊以闭塞颈动脉管内的颈内动脉。	When proximal control is necessary, the catheter balloon can be inflated to occlude the carotid artery in the carotid canal.
远端控制需暴露位于远环和近环之间的床突（旁）段颈内动脉，要完成这一步需打开眶上裂。	Distal control is possible by exposing the segment of the ICA between the dural rings. This exposure is achieved by opening the superior orbital fissure.
图6：在Glasscock三角内打开颈内动脉管顶壁，并置入Fogarty球囊。	Figure 6: The uncovering of the carotid artery underneath the Glasscock's triangle and the placement of the Fogarty balloon are demonstrated.
值得注意的是，只有在颈内动脉周围进行分离时，笔者才将球囊置入术野，而在这之前，并不提前进行该操作，以免影响其他操作。	Please note that the balloon in placed when the dissection around the carotid artery is undertaken. I do not place the balloon at the beginning of the procedure so it does not interfere with my dissection maneuvers.
进入海绵窦的入路	Entry into the Cavernous Sinus
如果计划做海绵窦内操作，那么可选择上方入路和外侧入路，或联合两者进入海绵窦。	If an intracavernous dissection is planned, the sinus can be entered via a superior or a lateral approach, or a combination of the two.
大多数情况下，肿瘤已穿透外侧壁，术者能以此探及进入海绵窦的径路。	Most often, the tumor reaches the surface of the lateral wall of the sinus and guides the surgeon regarding the point of entry.
另外，每一例肿瘤对海绵窦内外的解剖结构都可产生不同的病理性移位。	Moreover, each tumor displaces the intra- and paracavernous sinus structures in a unique way.
术者应利用肿瘤减压后的空间作为合适的径路。	The operator should use the space created by tumor debulking as the operative route.
上方入路	Superior Approach
该入路适用于海绵窦段颈内动脉前方、上方和/或内侧的肿瘤。	This is an approach for masses near the anterior, superior, and/or medial to the cavernous ICA.
沿视神经管全长切开硬膜，以游离视神经。	The dura over the optic nerve is incised over the length of the optic canal to untether the optic nerve.
紧接着，切开颈内动脉远环。	Next, the distal carotid ring is divided.
随后继续向动眼神经方向切开，即可形成进入海绵窦的初始入口。	The dura is then incised toward the oculomotor nerve, providing initial entry into the cavernous sinus.
可沿着颈内动脉周围进一步扩大暴露。	Exposure can be expanded by additional incisions along and around the carotid artery.
可继续切除后床突和鞍背以扩大暴露范围，并可进入后颅窝。	Further exposure can become available via a posterior clinoidectomy and resection of the dorsum sellae. Entry into the posterior fossa is possible.
还可磨除蝶骨平台。	The planum sphenoidale may also be drilled away.
注意封堵所有与鼻窦的沟通。	Any connection to the nasal sinuses should be sealed off.
外侧入路	Lateral Approach
该入路适用于海绵窦段颈内动脉外侧和/或下方的，以及位于海绵窦内后部的肿瘤。	The lateral approach is favorable for lesions lateral and/or inferior to the ICA and those that are posteriorly located within the cavernous sinus.
从硬膜外进入海绵窦的入路，首先需在三叉神经下颌支处切开硬膜固有层，剥离硬膜固有层直至显露三叉神经半月节。	Extradural entry begins by incising the dura propria encasing V3. The dura propria is peeled away until the ganglion is in view.
圆孔和卵圆孔周围的骨质磨除后可显露颞下窝。	The bone around the foramina rotundum and ovale is removed to allow exposure of the infratemporal fossa.
经Parkinson三角（即滑车下三角）是处理硬膜内/海绵窦内肿瘤的合适径路。	The Parkinson's (infratrochlear) triangle is a reasonable corridor to reach the intradural/intracavernous portion of the tumor.
在天幕游离缘暴露动眼神经和滑车神经，在滑车神经走行的下方切开硬膜。	CNs III and IVare found at the edge of the tentorium, and the dural incision is just beneath the route of CN IV.
向下延伸硬膜切口形成一硬膜辦，将其翻开至三叉神经半月节上方。	A dural flap is created by extending the dural incision inferiorly and reflecting the flap over the trigeminal ganglion.
切除肿瘤时，需注意保护外展神经，该神经常可分为2-5支神经束。	Tumor mobilization should protect CNVI which often consists of two to five fascicles.
图7：显示了海绵窦的各个外科三角。	Figure 7: The surgical triangles of the cavernous sinus are illustrated.
肿瘤的生长方式常常决定了术中进入海绵窦的路径。	The tumor often dictates the safe location of entry into the venous sinus.
在对神经移位方式进行预判后，滑车下三角和滑车上三角常可作为合适的入口。	The infra- and supratrochlear triangles are reasonable candidates for entry based on the estimated displacement patterns of the nerves.
中颅窝前内侧、前外侧三角也常常需要被打开。	The anteromedial and anterolateral triangles are other routes necessary for removal of these tumors.
注意Glasscock三角的位置，其用于颈内动脉岩骨段的暴露。	Note the location of the Glasscock's triangle for exposure of the carotid artery.
最后，对于那些在硬膜内、鞍上有广泛累及的肿瘤，笔者将额颞部凸面硬膜行标准的弧形切开，随后将海绵窦外的肿瘤与脑组织相分离，从视神经复合体及垂体柄上剥除肿瘤，并切除充斥于视神经颈内动脉三角和动眼神经颈内动脉三角内的肿瘤。	Finally, in the case of tumors with large intradural and suprasellar extension, I incise the convexity frontotemporal dura in standard curvilinear pattern and dissect the extracavernous portion of the meningioma from the brain.The tumor is peeled away from the optic apparatus and pituitary stalk. The parts of the tumor filling the opticocarotid and oculomotor-carotid triangles are also resected.
在切除肿瘤的过程中，应当尽可能切除受侵犯的或过度增生的骨质，以减少复发。	The surgeon should attempt to remove as much of the infiltrated or hyperostotic bone as safely as possible throughout the resection, decreasing the foci for recurrence.
在海绵窦内，需辨认和保护外展神经；术中电生理监测可辅助定位。	Within the cavernous sinus, CN VI is identified and protected; stimulation mapping may be used for its localization.
静脉性出血可通过轻柔填塞凝血酶浸泡过的明胶海绵来控制。	Venous bleeding is easily controlled with gentle thrombin-soaked gelfoam packing.
需强调的是，应利用显微剥离子和锐性分离来避免神经的牵拉伤。	Importantly, any traction injury in the nerves is avoided via the use of microdissectors and sharp dissection.
下面的示意图是对这些步骤的总结。	Some of these steps are summarized below.
图8：对海绵窦周围区域的暴露，可通过眶颧开颅或扩大翼点开颅，结合硬膜外前床突切除术即眶后部切开术来实现。	Figure 8: Exposure of the paracavernous area is readily possible via either an OZ osteotomy or extended pterional craniotomy along with extradural anterior clinoidectomy and posterior orbitotomy.
对于硬膜内入路，首先切除肿瘤的窦外部分，并在早期切开镰状韧带实现视神经减压。	For the intradural approach, the extracavernous portion of the tumor is resected first and the optic nerve is decompressed early via opening of the falciform ligament.
可沿蝶骨翼内侧的硬膜去除肿瘤窦外部分的血供。	The extracavernous section of the tumor is devascularized at its based along the medial sphenoid wing dura.
开放三叉神经出颅的骨孔，可暴露侵入这些骨孔的肿瘤。	The bone around the trigeminal foramina is drilled to expose the portion of the tumor penetrating into the trigeminal foramina.
图9：先处理累及视神经的肿瘤，以免在之后的操作中损伤视神经。	Figure 9: The components of the tumor affecting the optic nerve are removed first to protect the nerve during the rest of tumor manipulation.
将肿瘤包膜从视神经上锐性剥离下来。	Sharp dissection peels off the tumor capsule away from the nerve.
注意保护神经下表面的穿通动脉。	Perforating arteries along the inferior surface of the nerve are preserved.
注意处理肿瘤基底以减少血供，并尽可能彻底的瘤内减压。	Note aggressive devascularization of the tumor at its base and its thorough internal debulking.
使用固定牵开器适当牵开额叶和颞叶以对其进行保护。	The temporal and frontal lobes are gently "held in place" and protected via fixed retractors.
图10：继续将肿瘤包膜与视神经颈内动脉池内各神经血管结构相分离。	Figure 10: The tumor capsule is continuously mobilized away from the cerebrovascular structures within the opticocarotid cisterns and cranial nerves within the cavernous sinus.
该阶段最容易损伤的神经为滑车神经，可于天幕游离缘辨认并追踪其入海绵窦内。	Cranial nerve IV is particularly vulnerable to injury during this part of the operation and is identified at edge of the tentorium and followed into the cavernous sinus.
紧密粘连于神经的肿瘤碎片，应避免强行切除，以保留神经功能。	Any tumor fragments that are densely adherent to the nerves are left behind to protect function.
穿通动脉也应予以保护。	Perforating arteries in this area are respected.
图11：将肿瘤从半月神经节上仔细分离。	Figure 11: The tumor is carefully dissected from the Gasserian ganglion.
在保证安全的前提下，切除侵入三叉神经各骨孔内的肿瘤，必要时可扩大这些骨孔。	Any portion of the tumor infiltrating the trigeminal foramina is dissected if safely possible. The bony openings around the trigeminal nerve divisions are expanded, if necessary.
图12：切除肿瘤后最终的术野。	Figure 12: A final view of the operative field after tumor resection is illustrated.
滑车神经周围残留少量肿瘤，以避免永久性神经功能障碍。	Small amount of tumor is left around CN IV to avoid permanent morbidity.
蝶-海绵窦（spheno-cavernous sinus）脑膜瘤在海绵窦外侧壁附近通常存在一解剖间隙，有利于全切肿瘤而保护好神经结构。	The spheno-cavernous sinus meningiomas often harbor a dissection plane in proximity to the lateral cavernous wall, thereby allowing more aggressive dissection of the tumor from the neural structures.
若肿瘤侵及Meckel’s囊，则需切开三叉神经半月节表面的硬膜，沿着肿瘤向后将其切除。	If the tumor is infiltrating the Meckel's cave, the dura over the trigeminal ganglion is incised and the tumor is followed posteriorly for its removal.
与其他海绵窦脑膜瘤一样，肿瘤生长的路径也恰恰是手术暴露并切除它的最有效和安全的路径。	As in the case of other cavernous sinus meningiomas, the tumor creates the most viable, practical, and safe route for its access and removal.
严重纤维化以及含有钙化的肿瘤，很难做到全切而不损伤神经血管功能。	Thick fibrous tumors and those with calcified texture are not safely resectable away from the neurovascular structures.
54岁女性，表现为进行性面部麻木。	A 54-year-old woman presented with progressive facial numbness.
图13：第一排图片为该巨大海绵窦脑膜瘤的影像。	Figure 13: The images in the top row show the large cavernous sinus meningioma.
以右侧扩大翼点入路开颅。	A right-sided extended pterional approach was selected.
由于肿瘤体积巨大，故采用硬膜内-外联合入路。	Because of the large size of this tumor, a combination of both intra- and extradural routes was used.
硬膜内入路切开海绵窦外侧壁（第二排图片），肿瘤减压，可辨认三叉神经（插图）。	The lateral wall of the sinus was incised intradurally (second row of images), tumor debulked, and the trigeminal nerves identified (inset image).
切除窦壁的肿瘤，可见大脑中动脉分支粘连（第三排图片）。	Upon deflation of the sinus wall, the adherent middle cerebral artery branches were found (third row).
近全切肿瘤后，可见动眼神经（第四排图片）。	Upon near gross total removal of the tumor, CN III was apparent (bottom row of images).
在还纳骨瓣之前，需检查术腔，对可能存在的脑脊液漏口行自体肌肉或脂肪封堵。	Before the bone flap is replaced, the surgical cavity is inspected so that any source of cerebrospinal fluid leakage can be obliterated using pieces of autologous muscle or fat.
可从颞肌取小块肌肉填塞前床突切除后的空缺。	The area of the clinoidectomy is filled with a small pledget of muscle harvested from the temporalis muscle.
术后需在ICU中观察24-48小时。	Patients are typically observed in the Intensive Care Unit for 24 to 48 hours after surgery.
根据患者脑水肿程度及神经功能状态，在1周内逐渐减量类固醇激素。	The steroid dosage is tapered off within 1 week, depending on the extent of cerebral edema and the patient's neurologic status.
术后7天内行预防性抗癫痫治疗；对于出现癫痫的患者，则需用药至6个月到1年。	Seizure prophylaxis is continued for 7 days postoperatively; if the patient presented with a seizure, seizure prophylaxis is continued for 6 months to a year.
术后48小时复查头颅MRI，出院后3个月及此后每1年进行MRI动态随访，监测肿瘤复发。	Follow-up MRI is obtained within 48 hours of surgery, and once discharged from the hospital, the patient undergoes follow-up 3-month postoperative imaging followed by yearly surveillance imaging for early detection of recurrence.
需谨防海绵窦手术后的脑血管意外相关并发症，但这类情况相对少见。	Cerebrovascular accidents represent a major complication to keep in mind following surgery in the cavernous sinus, but this complication has a relatively infrequent incidence.
辅助性放疗在海绵窦脑膜瘤的治疗中占据越来越重要的地位，手术策略可相对保守，从而减少术后致残率。	The requirement of adjuvant radiation therapy is becoming an important topic of discussion for management of cavernous sinus meningiomas. Use of adjuvant radiation therapy permits a more conservative resection and decreases the rates of postoperative morbidity.
笔者针对侵袭性的局部病灶使用放射性治疗，这部分病例由于累及海绵窦内的重要结构，只能对肿瘤做到次全切除。	I focus on the use of radiotherapy for treating aggressive local disease, which commonly demands a subtotal resection due to the involvement of critical cavernous sinus anatomy.
一个重要的注意点是必须尽可能地切除视神经/视交叉周围的肿瘤，才能在进行高剂量的辅助放疗/放射外科治疗时不必担心放射相关的视神经损伤。	One important caveat regarding this adaptive approach is the need to sufficiently clear the tumor mass away from the optic nerves/chiasm to allow for the application of higher dose adjuvant radiotherapy/radiosurgery without concern for radiation-related optic neuropathy.
· 海绵窦脑膜瘤的合理手术策略包括全切窦外部分肿瘤和保守切除位于窦内的外侧部肿瘤。	Extracavernous tumor resection and conservative lateral intracavernous resection are reasonable strategies for handling meningiomas of the region.
· 术前的动眼、滑车、外展神经麻痹可通过肿瘤减压有效改善。	Preoperative palsy caused by tumor compression on CNs III, IV, and VI can improve after effective tumor decompression.
肿瘤的大范围切除并非颅神经功能改善所必须。	The extent of tumor resection is not necessarily related to the chance of recovery of CN function.
因此，保守切除肿瘤、对颅神经减压的手术原则，对于术前颅神经功能受损的病例是明智的。	Therefore, the principles of conservative tumor removal and CN decompression are wise strategies for patients with compromised preoperative CN function.
眼眶肿瘤	Orbital Tumor
眼眶可被多种病变类型累及。	The orbit can be affected by a wide variety of lesions.
眶部占位性病变的鉴别诊断包括甲状腺相关眼病、炎性病变、血管病变以及眼眶肿瘤。	Thyroid-associated orbitopathy, inflammatory lesions, vascular disorders, and orbital neoplasia are included in the differential diagnosis of masses within the orbit.
其中，甲亢眼病是一种促使眼外肌肥大的炎性疾病。	Dysthyroid orbitopathy is an inflammatory condition of the orbit that is associated with enlargement of the extraocular muscles.
根据病因可将眼眶肿瘤分为淋巴组织增生性病变（非霍奇金淋巴瘤是成人最常见的眶部恶性肿瘤）、视神经和脑膜肿瘤、泪腺肿瘤以及由临近结构侵犯入眶或转移来源的继发性肿瘤。	Orbital tumors can be classified into categories based on their etiology as lymphoproliferative lesions (non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is the most common malignant adult orbital tumor), optic nerve and meningeal lesions, lacrimal gland tumors, and secondary orbital tumors that extend into the orbit from nearby structures and metastases.
神经外科医师最常处理的涉眶病变是蝶-眶脑膜瘤和转移瘤。	For neurosurgeons, spheno-orbital meningiomas and metastases are among the most common tumors affecting the orbit.
其他也包括视神经脑膜瘤和胶质瘤、海绵状血管瘤、神经鞘瘤/神经纤维瘤以及腺样囊性癌。	Other lesions include optic nerve meningiomas and gliomas, cavernous hemangiomas, schwannomas/neurofibromas, and adenoid cystic carcinomas.
突眼和复视是眼眶肿瘤最常见的临床症状。	Proptosis and double vision are the most common presenting symptoms in patients with orbital lesions.
痛性突眼提示可能有炎症存在。	Painful proptosis suggests an underlying inflammatory process.
视力下降则表明病变已经累及眶尖和视神经。	A decrease in visual acuity indicates lesions affecting the orbital apex and the optic nerves.
入院评估	Evaluation
必须全面获取患者的病史资料并进行详细的体格检查。	A full history and complete physical exam should be obtained.
查体内容包括眼球运动、瞳孔大小及光反射、视力、视野、眼球位置和眼底。	The examination should include assessment of extraocular muscle movements, pupillary size and reaction to light, visual acuity, visual field, eye position, and the fundus.
治疗此类患者应该采用多学科合作模式，而眼整形医师在其中扮演着重要的角色。	Our oculoplastic colleagues are instrumental in the multidisciplinary care of these patients.
伴或不伴增强的MRI抑脂序列有助于判断肿瘤的边界以及与视神经的关系。	Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the orbit with and without gadolinium contrast with fat suppression sequences is helpful for clear delineation of the extent of the tumor and its relation to the optic nerve.
例如，视神经脑膜瘤和视神经胶质瘤表现为视神经增粗。	Optic nerve meningiomas and gliomas lead to circumferential enlargement of the nerve.
眼眶和鼻窦CT可以观察肿瘤与周围骨性结构的关系。	Computed tomography (CT) of the orbit and paranasal sinuses evaluates the relation of the tumor to the surrounding bony anatomy.
肌锥由各外直肌及其肌间隔围成，基底朝向眼球、顶端为视神经管，并以此区分锥内间隙和锥外间隙。	Orbital tumors may be divided into extraconal, intraconal, and intracanalicular tumors based on their location relative to the muscle cone. The muscle cone is defined by the extraocular rectus muscles and their intermuscular septae, which separate the intraconal from the extraconal space.
依据与肌锥的位置关系将眼眶肿瘤分为锥外型、锥内型和视神经管内型，这种分型决定着手术入路的选择。	The globe serves as the base and the optic canal as the apex of the muscle cone. The location of the tumor within the intraorbital compartments determines the operative approach.
图1.眶后上部的锥外型神经鞘瘤。	Figure 1: This intraorbital schwannoma was extraconal and occupied the posterior and superior aspects of the orbit.
可见视神经被内移和眶顶骨质受压侵蚀。	Note the medial location of the optic nerve and bone erosion of the orbital roof.
图2.眼球突出是眼眶肿瘤最常见的症状，图示是一例以此为表现的右眶脑膜瘤，肿瘤的位置及纤维样的质地决定了必须采用眶颧入路进行切除。	Figure 2: A right orbital meningioma with resultant proptosis is shown. The location and fibrous texture of this tumor required an orbitozygomatic craniotomy for its excision. Proptosis is one of the most common presenting symptoms of patients with orbital tumors.
请参阅本文其他内容了解更多眼眶肿瘤的诊断和评估详情。	For more details about the diagnosis and evaluation of orbital tumors, please refer to this article.
如果术中需要在硬膜外进行操作分离，推荐采用腰大池引流降低颅内压力以促进硬膜剥离。	If extradural dissection is necessary, I prefer to use a lumbar drain to decompress the dura and facilitate its mobilization.
处理累及海绵窦的病变时，电生理监测第Ⅲ、Ⅳ和Ⅵ颅神经的电位信息没有任何重要意义而且监测结果也不可靠，因此笔者并不推荐。	I do not favor the use of neurophysiologic monitoring for cranial nerves III, IV, and VI for lesions that invade the cavernous sinus. The resultant potentials do not add any significant value and the monitoring results are unreliable.
如果预计眶顶壁或者外侧壁的切除范围将超过75%，应该在术前定制一个合适的植入假体用于术毕时重建眶壁。	If I expect to resect more than 75% of the superior or lateral orbital walls, I prepare a custom implant prosthesis preoperatively. This implant is used to reconstruct the orbital walls at the end of surgery.
掌握眼眶的解剖对于选择合理的手术入路和规避潜在的并发症很重要。	An understanding of the surgical anatomy of the orbit is important for proper selection of the surgical approach and to avoid potential complications.
眼眶是一个四棱锥形的腔隙，往后通过视神经管和眶上裂与前、中颅窝沟通，往下与颞下窝和翼腭窝沟通。	The orbit is a quadrangular space that communicates posteriorly with the anterior and middle cranial fossae via the optic canal and superior orbital fissure and inferiorly with the infratemporal and pterygopalatine fossae.
眼眶由7块骨头围成：顶壁隔离额窦和前颅底，由额骨和蝶骨小翼构成；	Seven bones form the bony orbit. The orbital roof is formed by the frontal bone and lesser wing of sphenoid. The orbital roof separates the orbital contents from the frontal sinus and anterior cranial fossa.
底壁隔离上颌窦，由颧骨和腭骨构成；	The zygomatic and palatine bones form the orbital floor, which separates the orbit from the maxillary sinus.
内侧壁则为一层菲薄的骨质即纸样板，这是内镜入路进眶的潜在通道。	The medial wall is a thin bone known as the lamina papyracea, a potential corridor for endoscopic approaches to the orbit.
眶内侧壁隔离筛窦和蝶窦，并含有筛前和筛后动脉穿行的小管孔，由上颌骨、泪骨、筛骨和蝶骨小翼构成。	The medial wall is also formed by the maxillary, lacrimal, ethmoid, and lesser wing of sphenoid, which separates the orbital contents from the ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses. The medial wall contains the foramina for the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries.
眶外侧壁由颧骨额突和蝶骨大翼构成。	The lateral wall of the orbit is also formed by the frontal process of the zygomatic bone and the greater wing of the sphenoid.
眶尖指向内侧，含有视神经管及眶上、下裂。	The orbital apex is directed medially and contains the optic canal, as well as the superior and inferior orbital fissures.
视神经管长5-20mm、宽4.5mm、平均高度为5mm。	The optic canal is 5 to 20 mm long, 4.5 mm wide, and 5 mm in average height.
视柱是一条连接前床突和蝶骨体的骨嵴。	The optic strut is a bony ridge that connects the anterior clinoid process and the body of the sphenoid bone.
在视神经管内口处视神经被一层厚的反折硬膜即镰状韧带所覆盖。	The falciform ligament is a thick fold of dura that covers the optic nerve at its entry point into its foramen and the orbit.
眶上裂是一个三角形的裂隙，其后缘与海绵窦相关，前缘与眶尖内容物相关，眼眶由此与中颅窝沟通。	The superior orbital fissure is a triangular-shaped aperture that allows communication between the orbit and the middle cranial fossa. The cavernous sinus is related to its posterior margin, and the contents of the orbital apex are related to the anterior margin of the superior orbital fissure.
眶下裂呈狭长状，其后内部与翼腭窝沟通，前外部与颞下窝沟通。	The inferior orbital fissure is a narrow, long aperture. The posteromedial part of this fissure communicates with the pterygopalatine fossa, while the anterolateral part communicates with the infratemporal fossa.
覆盖于中颅底和海绵窦的硬膜穿过眶上裂和视神经管后移行为眶筋膜和Zinn总腱环。	The dura covering the cavernous sinus and middle cranial fossa continues through the superior orbital fissure and optic canal to blend with the periorbita and the annular tendon of Zinn.
Zinn总腱环包绕眶上裂内侧部和视神经管，是直肌群的起源。	The annular tendon of Zinn surrounds the optic canal and the medial part of the superior orbital fissure, and serves as the origin of the recti muscles.
视神经分为四段：眼内段、眶内段、管内段和颅内段。	The optic nerve is divided into four segments: intraocular, intraorbital, intracanalicular, and intracranial segments.
其中颅内段的视神经平均长度为15mm，位于颈内动脉内侧，并且延续为视交叉。	The optic nerve travels an average of 15 mm intradurally and within the subarachnoid space medial to the internal carotid arteries before reaching the chiasm.
颅内包裹视神经的蛛网膜随同进眶并融入眼球。	The encasing intracranial arachnoid layers continue on the optic nerve and finally fuse with the pia of the globe.
眼动脉是颈内动脉床突上段的第一个分支。	The ophthalmic artery represents the first branch of the supraclinoid internal carotid artery distal to the cavernous sinus.
在视神经管内，位于视神经的外下方。	In the optic canal, the ophthalmic artery is lateral and inferior to the optic nerve.
而当眼动脉穿出视神经管外口和总腱环后越过视神经上方者占85%。	After coursing through the optic foramen and the annular tendon, the ophthalmic artery crosses above the optic nerve in 85% of the orbits.
距眼球后方8-15mm处，眼动脉发出视网膜的主要供血动脉即视网膜中央动脉。	The central retinal artery arises from the ophthalmic artery 8 to 15 mm behind the globe and provides the main blood supply to the retina.
随后眼动脉走形于上斜肌和内直肌之间，并发出筛前和筛后动脉。	The ophthalmic artery continues between the superior oblique and the medial rectus muscles, where it gives rise to the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries.
了解眼动脉和视神经的解剖关系对避免损伤两者非常重要。	Knowledge of these anatomic relationships of the ophthalmic artery to the optic nerve is important to avoid injury to both structures.
眼上、下静脉是眼眶主要的静脉引流系统。	The superior and inferior ophthalmic veins provide the main venous drainage system of the orbit.
眼上静脉起自眶上内侧部,走形于上斜肌外侧，并越过视神经到达眶外侧部。	The superior ophthalmic vein arises in the supramedial compartment of the orbit. It travels lateral to the superior oblique muscles, and crosses over the optic nerve to reach the lateral part of the orbit.
眼下静脉起自眶底前部，通过眶下裂与翼静脉丛吻合。	The inferior ophthalmic vein arises in the anterior part of the floor. It communicates with the pterygoid venous plexus through the inferior orbital fissure.
通常两条静脉进入海绵窦前会在眶上裂处形成一条静脉干。	The superior and the inferior ophthalmic veins usually join to form a common trunk at the superior orbital fissure before draining into the cavernous sinus.
额神经走形于上睑提肌和上直肌上表面，透过眶筋膜可以看到。	The frontal nerve travels over the levator and superior rectus muscles. It may be visualized through the periorbita.
而滑车神经由外向内跨越视神经后也在同一平面走形最终到达上斜肌。	The trochlear nerve runs in the same plane and crosses the optic nerve from the lateral-to-medial direction to innervate the superior oblique muscle.
图3. 右眶的局部解剖（上面观），请参阅前文了解更多。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr馈赠）	Figure 3: The regional anatomy of the right orbit from a superior view is shown. Please see above text for more details (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图4. 眶内解剖补充图。	Figure 4: Additional views of the intraorbital anatomy are illustrated.
请注意在视神经管内，眼动脉位于视神经的外下方。	Note the route of the ophthalmic artery relative to the optic nerve around the foramen. In the optic canal, the ophthalmic artery is lateral and inferior to the optic nerve.
而当眼动脉穿出视神经管外口和总腱环后将从视神经上方越过。	After coursing through the optic foramen and the annular tendon, the ophthalmic artery crosses above the nerve.
打开眶筋膜暴露肿瘤时应该避免损伤邻近的肌肉和神经血管结构。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr馈赠）	Opening the periorbita to reach the tumor should avoid the muscles and neurovascular structures at the periphery of the intraorbital contents (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
眼眶肿瘤的手术入路	SURGICAL APPROACHES TO ORBITAL TUMORS
眼眶是一个可分为三个腔隙的三维结构：肌锥内、肌锥外和视神经管内。	The orbit is a three-dimensional structure that may be divided into three potential spaces: intraconal, extraconal, and intracanalicular.
有多种手术入路能够到达眶内，但主要还是经颅、经颅外和内镜入路。	The orbit may be accessed through multiple approaches, but mainly via the transcranial, extracranial, and endoscopic corridors.
选择何种入路取决于多种因素，包括肿瘤类型以及预计的粘连程度和质地、大小、位置和临近结构的受累程度。	The selection of the surgical approach is determined by multiple factors, including the type of tumor and its expected adherence and texture, size, location, and extension into adjacent compartments.
位于眼眶后内1/3的病变可以采用经半月襞或泪阜入路、断或不断内直肌，经皮入路（译者注：经上眼睑入路）、眶外侧壁切开或者经内侧结膜入路。	Lesions in the medial posterior third of the orbit are explored via a semilunar fold or caruncular incision, with or without disinsertion of the medial rectus muscle, a direct cutaneous incision, lateral orbitotomy, and medial conjunctival incision.
眶颧入路也是可行的，这样能够全方位地显露眶内容物。	Another option is an orbitozygomatic craniotomy that can provide a relatively panoramic view of the orbital contents.
颅-眶沟通病变比如侵犯眼眶的颗粒型蝶骨嵴脑膜瘤将在外侧型蝶骨嵴脑膜瘤章节中讨论。	Cranio-orbital lesions such as en plaque sphenoid wing meningiomas that invade the orbit are discussed in the Lateral Sphenoid Wing Meningioma chapter.
眶颧入路或眶-额颞入路	Orbitozygomatic or Orbitofrontotemporal Craniotomy
对于临近眶尖或侵犯多个部位（包括眼眶）的肿瘤，笔者会采用改良的眶颧入路（OZ）进行切除。	I use the modified orbitozygomatic craniotomy (OZ) for tumors located near the orbital apex or those involving multiple compartments including the orbit.
剥离硬膜以便去除眶顶。	Extradural dissection is performed to properly unroof the orbit.
一般通过硬膜外前床突切除术减压视神经，否则在肿瘤切除过程中视神经可能会被意外卡压在管口处。	The optic nerve is typically decompressed via an extradural clinoidectomy so that the nerve is not inadvertently compressed at its foramen during manipulation of the tumor.
眶顶壁和外侧壁的切除范围取决于肿瘤的大小。	The extent of superior and lateral orbital wall resection depends on the breadth of the tumor in the region.
腰穿引流脑脊液（CSF）则有助于安全牵拉脑组织并使硬膜损伤风险最小化。	Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage allows safe brain mobilization and minimizes the risk of dural injury.
在肿瘤上方打开眶筋膜避开上直肌和上睑提肌。	I incise the periorbital fascia over the tumor while avoiding injury to the superior rectus and levator muscles.
个别肿瘤会通过视神经管长进颅内，这时就需要切开额部的硬膜。	Very rarely, the frontal lobe dura is also incised if the tumor extends through the optic canal and into the intracranial space.
松解镰状韧带以进一步减压视神经管处的视神经。	The falciform ligament is released to further decompress the optic nerve at its canal.
可以通过术中超声精确定位眶内肿瘤，但是指压触诊一般就已经足够了。	Proper localization of the intraorbital tumor may be performed by intraoperative ultrasound; digital palpation is adequate.
使用棉签（Q-tips）钝性分离眶脂肪，并不需要引入自动牵开器。	Blunt dissection of the orbital fat using Q-tips is reasonable. Self-retaining retractor blades are not needed.
肿瘤切除遵循显微手术的基本原则。	Resection of the tumor follows the general principles of tumor microsurgery.
可能需要打开Zinn总腱环暴露视神经内侧或背侧的肿瘤。	It may be necessary to open the annulus of Zinn for tumors medial or dorsal to the optic nerve.
此时切口应局限于上睑提肌和上直肌的内侧起点处，以免损伤动眼神经的分支。	The opening should be limited to the medial insertion points of the levator and the superior rectus muscles to avoid the branches of the oculomotor nerve.
同时应该尽量保留滑车神经。	The trochlear nerve should be preserved, if possible.
依笔者经验，如果眶顶切除范围不超过75%，不必进行眶顶重建。	In my experience, it is not necessary to reconstruct the orbital roof after resection unless more than 75% of the roof has been removed.
为了避免术后眼球内陷，应使用术前定制的材料进行眶顶的部分重建。	To avoid postoperative endophthalmus, I partially reconstruct the roof using custom implants that were prepared preoperatively.
术后几天内的眶周瘀血和肿胀对冷敷处理反应良好。	Periorbital ecchymosis and swelling respond to cold compresses within a few days.
如果瘀血严重还应注意防范结膜损伤。	Severe ecchymosis may occur, and care should be taken to avoid conjunctival injury.
复查CT排除明显的颅内积气和颅内出血后方可将患者转移到普通病房。	A postoperative computed tomography scan should be performed to rule out significant pneumocephalus and intracranial hemorrhage before the patient is transferred to the regular ward.
行眶部MRI评估肿瘤的切除程度。	MR images of the orbit assess the adequacy of resection.
术后几天内患者可能会感到眼球搏动，不过最终会消失。	The patient may feel globe pulsation for a few days postoperatively, which will eventually subside.
眉弓切口眶上锁孔入路	Supraorbital Keyhole Craniotomy/Osteotomy through an Eyebrow Incision
眶上入路非常适合位于视神经上方边界清楚的锥内型和锥外型占位，也适合处理Willis环前段的血管病变和鞍旁的肿瘤病变。	The supraorbital craniotomy is favored for surgery on well-circumscribed intraconal and extraconal masses above the optic nerve. This approach is also reasonable to access vascular and neoplastic lesions of the anterior segment of the circle of Willis and parasellar region, respectively.
采用额外侧/眶上入路以单骨瓣法卸下眶壁，并切除余下的眶顶以暴露病变。	The orbital rim is mobilized with the lateral frontal/supraorbital craniotomy in one piece. Additional bone is resected along the roof of the orbit to expose the lesion.
肿瘤显露、切除和眶顶重建的方法与前文“眶颧入路或眶-额颞入路”所述类似。	Tumor exposure, resection and reconstruction of the roof are performed similarly to those described above in the Orbitozygomatic or Orbitofrontotemporal Craniotomy section.
图6. 通过眶上入路单瓣眶壁截骨（中图）切除位于眼眶上部并导致突眼的神经鞘瘤。	Figure 6: This schwannoma within the superior compartment of the orbit led to proptosis. I decided on a supraorbital craniotomy with an orbital rim osteotomy (middle photo) to remove the lesion.
注意肿瘤表面的神经起源（底图）。	Note the involved nerve on the surface of the tumor (bottom photo).
眶外侧入路（眶外侧壁切开术）	Lateral Orbital Approach (Lateral Orbitotomy)
Kronlein于1889年首次描述了眼眶的侧方入路。	Kronlein first described a lateral approach to the orbit in 1889.
1976年，Maroon和Kennerdell对切口进行改进并引入手术显微镜。	In 1976, Maroon and Kennerdell modified the incision and recommended the use of the operating microscope.
改良后的切口形似曲棍球球棍，绕着外侧眉毛延伸至外眦后方的35-40mm处，不仅有效地避开了支配额肌的面神经，还能够处理上方、下方和外侧方的锥内型肿瘤。	The incision is shaped like a hockey stick curved up around the lateral brow. To avoid frontalis nerve injury, the incision should not extend 35 to 40 mm posterior to the lateral canthus. No additional modifications of the incision are necessary for superior, lateral, or inferior intraconal tumors.
沿皮肤切口从额颧复合体（frontozygomatic bone）的中点开始切开颞肌筋膜，颞肌牵向后方以暴露眶外侧壁，再弧形切开其表面的骨膜。随后在可弯小压肠板（malleable ribbon）的保护下从眶壁内面剥离眶筋膜。	The temporalis fascia is incised, starting at the midpoint of the frontozygomatic bone along the skin incision. A curved incision is made over the periosteum of the frontozygomatic bone. The periorbita is dissected from the lateral orbital wall and protected using a malleable ribbon. The temporalis muscle is retracted posteriorly to expose the lateral orbital wall.
使用不带护板的B1铣刀在颧额缝上方进行第一道截骨，这样可以使额颧复合体作为整体被卸下。	A B1 bit without a footplate starts the first bone cut above the frontozygomatic suture and disconnects the lateral orbital rim along with the frontozygomatic bone.
随后在第一道下方1.5cm的地方截第二道，从而完成眶外侧壁切开。	Another cut is made 1.5 cm inferior to the first cut to finish the lateral orbitotomy.
进一步用磨钻磨除部分蝶骨以暴露眶尖。	The drill is used to remove additional parts of the sphenoid bone and obtain further apical exposure.
在外直肌下方或肿瘤的隆起部位切开眶筋膜，牵开外直肌以便更好地操作肿瘤包膜，切忌直接离断外直肌否则会导致瘢痕形成和眼球活动受限。	The periorbita is exposed and incised over the bulk of the tumor above or below the lateral rectus muscle. Mobilization of the lateral rectus muscle allows more control over the tumor capsule. The muscle is not dissected directly to avoid scarring and restriction of eye movements.
余下的肿瘤切除过程与前文所述相同。	The rest of the dissection is performed similar to those  used for the other orbital tumors mentioned above.
术后患者经常有复视出现，这个症状往往会在数周内消失。	Patients often experience postoperative diplopia that usually resolves within several weeks.
经鼻入路	Endonasal Approaches
推荐对位于眼眶内下象限的肿瘤采用扩大经鼻入路。	Extended endonasal approaches are recommended for orbital tumors located in the medial and inferior half of the orbit.
经鼻入路主要是通过纸样板入眶。	The main endonasal route to the orbit is through the lamina papyracea.
此外，经上颌窦的肌锥外入路也是可行的。	The transmaxillary extraconal approach is an alternative route.
· 改良OZ入路最具灵活性并能全方位地显露眶内容物。	The modified OZ provides the most flexible and panoramic view of the intraorbital contents.
三叉神经痛治疗总则	General Considerations
三叉神经痛（TN）被称为是人类所遭受最严重的疼痛之一。	Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) has been called one of the worst pains that can afflict a human being.
早在1773年，John Fothergill在一篇题为“面部疼痛”的文章中率先描述了该疾患。	John Fothergill was one of the first to describe this pain in his 1773 article: “On a Painful Affliction of the Face” .
TN的疼痛诊断相对容易，其典型表现为单侧面部、间断发作的剧烈的刺痛或电击样、针刺样疼痛，该疼痛还可因皮肤受到刺激而加重，如面部触压、咀嚼、刷牙、清风拂面或剃须等。	The pain of TN is relatively easy to diagnose—it is typically unilateral, episodic, severe, stabbing, shock-like or lancinating, and exacerbated by cutaneous stimuli such as tactile pressure, chewing, brushing, a breeze of air, or shaving.
粗略估计TN男性和女性的年发病率分别约为2.5/10万和5.7/10万。	A crude annual incidence of TN is approximately 5.7 per 100,000 women and 2.5 per 100,000 men.
发病年龄高峰在50岁-60岁之间，患病率随年龄增长而增加。	Peak incidence lies between ages 50 and 60 years, and prevalence increases with age.
发病初期，相对于止痛类药物，小剂量的抗癫痫药物（如卡马西平）可以很好地缓解TN，。	Initially a small dose of an antiepileptic drug (such as carbamazepine), rather than an analgesic drug, can provide excellent pain relief for TN.
然而，一些患者对抗癫痫药不敏感或者无法耐受相应的副作用，只能选择手术治疗（如微血管减压术、立体定向射频热凝术、通过甘油注射、球囊压迫或放射外科进行三叉神经根毁损术）。	However, some patients do not respond to antiepileptic drugs or they suffer from adverse side effects, so they will qualify as candidates for one of the surgical procedures (microvascular decompression, stereotactic radiofrequency thermoablation, glycerol or balloon compression, and radiosurgery rhizotomy).
无论三叉神经痛的发病机制如何，微血管减压（MVD）术可以通过移除责任血管或切断神经根缓解症状，是一种有效、可靠的姑息性疗法。	Regardless of the responsible etiology in the pathogenesis of this pain, MVD surgery, through mobilizing the offending vessel or by performing a rhizotomy, provides an effective and durable palliative option for symptomatic relief.
虽然经皮穿刺Gasserian神经节（译者注：半月神经节）进行神经根切断是一种更为微创的入路，但只有后颅窝探查是唯一能够通过无损伤操作识别责任血管获取持久疗效的手段。	Although percutaneous procedures offer a less invasive route to the Gasserian ganglion for rhizotomy, posterior fossa exploration is the only procedure that can identify an offending vessel via a nondestructive procedure with a more lasting result.
影响MVD手术实施重要因素包括患者的年龄、患病情况及其个人意愿。	The patient’s age, medical comorbidities, and preferences are important factors that can limit the application of an MVD operation.
对于年龄超过70岁或有手术禁忌症、无法耐受MVD 的患者，笔者选择经皮穿刺治疗。	I offer percutaneous procedures to my patients who are older than 70 years or who have prohibitive medical comorbidities that preclude their candidacy for an MVD operation.
对于继发于多发性硬化的TN，无论年龄大小，笔者一律选择经皮穿刺治疗。	I also offer a percutaneous procedure to patients who have a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis and associated TN, regardless of their age.
图1. Harvey Cushing早期的一位饱受TN折磨的患者。	Figure 1: One of the first patients of Harvey Cushing suffering from an attack of trigeminal neuralgia.
本图可能是最早记录该病的图像（图由耶鲁大学Cushing中心提供）。	This image is most likely one of the earliest photographs of a patient with this disease (Courtesy of Cushing Center at Yale University).
包括TN、面肌痉挛、中间神经痛（译者注：膝状神经节神经痛）、阵发性位置性眩晕和舌咽神经痛在内的颅神经机能亢进综合征的发病机制至今仍不清楚。	The pathogenesis of cranial nerve hyperactivity syndromes, such as TN, hemifacial spasm, geniculate neuralgia, paroxysmal positional vertigo, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia, has remained elusive.
目前认为神经在脑干附近受到血管压迫（神经血管外周干扰假说）导致神经根在进/出颅处发生脱髓鞘改变（假突触传递）是形成颅神经机能亢进的主要因素。	Vascular compression of the nerves near the brainstem (neurovascular conflict-peripheral hypothesis) has been proposed as the principal factor involved in genesis of cranial nerve hyperactivity through demyelination of the root entry/exit zone of the nerve (ephaptic transmission).
最新的研究表明，其他因素同样会引起这些神经功能紊乱，包括脑干核团的功能亢进（中央假说）。	Recently, investigators have implicated other factors as causes for these disorders, including hyperactivity of the brainstem nuclei (central hypothesis).
诊断TN和其他阵发性单侧神经痛样的疼痛疾患的几乎完全依赖于患者的病史。	The diagnosis of TN and other episodic, unilateral neuralgiform pain disorders is based almost entirely on the patient’s history.
TN疼痛的典型特征是单侧和神经痛样的表现，后者表现为间断发作的剧烈的刺痛或电击样、针刺样疼痛，该疼痛还可因皮肤受到刺激而加重，如面部触压、咀嚼、刷牙、清风拂面或剃须等。	The character of TN pain is typically unilateral and neuralgic: episodic, severe, stabbing, shock-like or lancinating, and exacerbated by cutaneous stimuli such as tactile pressure, chewing, brushing, a breeze of air, or shaving.
随着时间推移，疼痛缓解期越来越短，发作持续时间常会越来越长。	The periods of remission tend to get shorter over time and the attacks of pain often get longer.
患者每天发作次数少则3-4次，多则达70次。	Patients may have as few as three or four attacks a day or as many as 70 per day.
TN通常还存在疼痛无法被（上述刺激）诱发的不应期。	There is often a refractory period when the pain cannot be triggered.
1/3的患者疼痛发生在夜晚。	Pain can occur at night in a third of patients.
TN不常单独发生于三叉神经的第一分支眼支。	It is unusual to have TN in the first ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve only.
采用卡马西平或加巴喷丁等针对神经病理性疼痛的药物进行实验性治疗，良好的反应通常支持典型TN的诊断。	The tentative desirable response to neuropathic pain medications, such as carbamazepine or gabapentin, often supports the diagnosis of typical TN.
疼痛的特征可能会随着服用针对神经病理性疼痛的药物或接受经皮穿刺治疗而改变，疼痛可能变得更为持久。	The pain characteristics may change with the use of neuropathic pain medications or previous percutaneous procedures, and may become more constant.
因此，临床医生应该询问患者一开始尚未接受任何治疗前疼痛的性质。	Therefore, the clinician should inquire about the character of the pain at its inception before any treatment was rendered.
存在神经性疼痛症状（仅持续性或烧灼样疼痛、面部麻痹且不存在扳机点效应）的患者应诊断为非典型面部疼痛，而非TN，这部分患者不作为以下章节讨论的手术对象。	Patients who complain of neuropathic pain (only constant or burning pain and facial numbness without triggering stimuli) are suffering from atypical facial pain, not TN, and are not candidates for the procedures described in the following chapters.
对患者面部、口腔及颅神经进行仔细的体检相当重要。	It is important to carefully examine the patient’s face and oral cavity along with the cranial nerves.
在TN患者身上，详细的神经系统检查结果通常是阴性的，但三叉神经分布区轻微的感觉改变却相当常见。	Detailed neurologic examination of patients with TN is usually normal, but minor sensory changes in the corresponding distribution of the trigeminal nerve are fairly common.
所有拟接受手术治疗的TN患者应该行MRI或CT以排除结构性病变，如脑膜瘤、听神经瘤和表皮样肿瘤。	All patients who are planning to undergo any intervention for TN should have brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or a computed tomography (CT) scan to exclude structural pathologies such as meningioma, acoustic neuroma, and epidermoid tumors.
在高分辨率MRI T2WI上可能可以观察到血管环压迫三叉神经。	A vascular loop compressing the trigeminal nerve may be evident on high-resolution T2WI.
经皮穿刺治疗三叉神经痛的适应症	Indications for Percutaneous Treatment of Trigeminal Neuralgia
典型的TN患者治疗起始选用药物治疗，通常为抗癫痫药物，选择的金标准药物是卡马西平。	Treatment of all patients with classical TN begins with drug therapy, usually anticonvulsants, and the gold standard is carbamazepine.
新型药物如奥卡西平由于较小的副作用也在临床中迅速普及。	Newer drugs such as oxcarbazepine are rapidly gaining popularity due to better side-effect profiles.
这些药物可以使70%的患者疼痛完全缓解。	These medications can initially provide 100% pain relief in 70% of patients.
然而，尽管使用神经性疼痛药物治疗，许多患者的疼痛转变为难治性，故希望寻求疗效更持久的外科治疗。	However, despite the use of neuropathic pain medications, many patients’ pain becomes refractory and they seek more durable surgical treatment.
外科干预治疗的适应症包括但不限于药物治疗失败或产生药物副作用的患者。	Indications for surgical intervention include, but are not limited to, failure of or adverse side effects from medical treatment.
MVD手术可以为患者提供最持久而令人满意的效果，但对年龄大于70岁或合并其他相关禁忌症而不能接受全麻的患者，应考虑选择更为微创的经皮穿刺治疗或放射外科治疗。	Microvascular decompression (MVD) has been shown to provide the most durable satisfactory results; however, patients older than 70 years or with associated prohibitive medical morbidities or conditions that preclude general anesthesia can be considered suitable candidates for less invasive percutaneous or radiosurgical procedures.
治疗TN的经皮穿刺术是一种姑息的破坏性手术，通过控制性损坏三叉神经根达到缓解疼痛目标。	Percutaneous procedures for TN are palliative destructive procedures that involve controlled damage to the trigeminal nerve root with the goal of relieving pain.
这些手术包括三叉神经根射频毁损/射频热凝术、三叉神经根甘油注射和球囊压迫。	These procedures include radiofrequency rhizotomy/thermoablation, glycerol rhizotomy, and balloon compression.
所有这些手术操作是通过卵圆孔穿刺进行的，该操作于1914年由Härtel首次描述。	All of these procedures are performed via a foramen ovale puncture, which was first described by Härtel in 1914.
我们将逐一讨论这些操作及他们的优势和潜在不足。	We will discuss these modalities individually and their advantages and potential pitfalls.
治疗规范	Treatment Paradigm
对于不能进行MVD手术的患者，笔者一般选择球囊压迫三叉神经根，因为该操作容易且快速有效。	For patients who cannot undergo an MVD operation, I generally prefer balloon compression rhizotomy because it is easy to perform and immediately effective.
放射外科治疗通常无法立即缓解疼痛，许多患者需要通过继续服用针对神经性疼痛的药物控制疼痛。	Radiosurgery often does not offer immediate pain relief and many patients continue to require neuralgic medications for their pain control.
如果患者存在合并症不能接受全身麻醉且不需要立刻缓解疼痛，笔者会将放疗作为首选。	If the patient harbors comorbidities that preclude the use of general anesthesia and immediate pain relief is not a concern, I offer radiosurgery as a reasonable option.
笔者选择手术干预治疗的大致流程图如下所示。	I use the algorithmic approach shown in the following illustration for selection of the operative intervention.
选择经皮穿刺治疗的TN患者一般是老年及多种合并症者。	Patients who are candidates for percutaneous treatment of TN are generally elderly and harbor multiple medical comorbidities.
这些患者术前应进行详细的麻醉评估，包括心肺功能。	These patients should undergo extensive preoperative anesthesia evaluation to assess their cardiac and respiratory status.
特别应该高度重视心脏评估，因为一旦进行卵圆孔操作，有相当高比例患者会出现三叉神经抑制反应后继发性心动过缓和低血压。	Special emphasis should be placed on cardiac evaluation since a high proportion of patients will experience bradycardia and hypotension secondary to trigeminal depressor response once the foramen ovale is accessed.
为此，一些外科医生主张在麻醉诱导后进行经皮或经食管放置心脏起搏器。	For this reason, some surgeons advocate placing a transcutaneous or a transesophageal pacemaker after induction of anesthesia.
应该提倡让患者学会如何射频消融术中对面部刺激进行定位和描述。	Patients should be encouraged to learn how to localize and designate where they perceive facial stimulation during radiofrequency ablation.
虽然不是强制要求，但应建议患者术前停用抗凝药物5-7天。	Patients are encouraged to discontinue anticoagulation 5-7 days before the procedure, although this is not absolutely necessary.
患者的神经检查应集中于面部功能。	A baseline neurologic exam focusing on the face should be performed.
角膜反射和面部任何部位的麻痹都应仔细记录。	Corneal reflex and any areas of facial numbness are carefully documented.
此外，三叉神经支配的任何肌肉（咬肌和翼状肌）功能减弱也应注意。	Furthermore, weakness in any of the trigeminal innervated muscles (masseter, pterygoids) should also be noted.
术前应该取出义齿。	Dentures should be removed before the procedure.
术后继续服用针对神经性疼痛药物并逐渐减量。	Preoperative neuropathic pain medications should be continued and tapered off gradually in the postoperative period.
经皮穿刺术不适用于面部疼痛分布区存在麻木的患者	Patients who suffer from numbness in the distribution of their pain are not candidates for percutaneous procedures.
手术方法：相关的手术操作细节请分别参阅以下章节：	Procedures: Please refer to the following individual chapters regarding the specifics of technique:
卵圆孔穿刺	Placement of the Needle within the Foramen Ovale
球囊压迫三叉神经根	Balloon Compression Rhizotomy
三叉神经根射频毁损	Radiofrequency Rhizotomy
甘油注射三叉神经根毁损	Glycerol Rhizotomy
对于经皮穿刺术后的患者，笔者习惯在出院前对其留观2-4小时。	After any percutaneous procedure, I prefer to keep patients under observation for 2 to 4 hours before their discharge.
术后应该即刻进行检查，包括面部和角膜的感觉，咬肌、翼状肌、眼部和面部肌肉运动强度。	An immediate postoperative examination should examine facial and corneal sensation and motor strength of the masseter, pterygoids, ocular, and facial muscles.
穿刺点的出血可进行简单的压迫处理。	Any bleeding from the needle insertion site can be simply treated by applying pressure.
当患者角膜反射受到损害时，需要对其眼部仔细护理。	Meticulous eye care is needed in cases when corneal reflex is likely to be compromised.
术前药物继续服用，于2周后逐渐减量。	Preoperative medications are continued and slowly tapered over the next 2 weeks.
医生应该就术后面部和眼部麻痹等问题对患者及其家属进行基本的指导。	Patients and their family members should be given basic instructions about numbness in the face and eyes.
告知他们术后几天内可能发生小概率的唇疱疹，应与其主治医生保持联系。	They should be informed about the small likelihood of cold sores a few days after the procedure and instructed to contact their treating physicians.
术后2周出现发热、意识混乱应高度怀疑脑膜炎。	Fever and confusion during the 2-week postoperative period should raise the suspicion of meningitis.
并发症	Complications
三叉神经节周围存在较多重要结构，包括颈动脉、与海绵窦伴行或走行于海绵窦内的颅神经及颞叶。	Multiple structures surround the trigeminal ganglion, including the carotid artery, cranial nerves along and within the cavernous sinus, and the temporal lobe.
如果选择的操作轨迹错误，所有这些结构将有损伤风险。	All these structures are at risk if the selected trajectory is erroneous.
应激状态下，经皮穿刺也可能出现心血管系统问题，因此，麻醉师应该考虑到相关风险，以便妥善应对。	The percutaneous procedures also place the cardiovascular system under stress, so our anesthesiologist colleagues should consider relevant risks.
潜在的并发症包括：	Potential complications include:
颊粘膜穿透：引导穿刺针/套管进入卵圆孔过程中，应该小心且勿侵犯颊粘膜。	Penetration of the Buccal Mucosa: Care should be taken not to violate the buccal mucosa while guiding the needle/cannula toward the foramen ovale.
若操作中，不小心损伤到颊粘膜，将增加术后细菌性脑膜炎的发生率。	An unnoticed buccal mucosal violation increases the likelihood of postoperative bacterial meningitis.
笔者使用其食指接触和引导套管前端以确保粘膜的完整。	I use my index finger to palpate and guide the tip of the cannula to ensure mucosal integrity.
如果术中意外发生颊粘膜损伤，应更换新的穿刺针/套管并采用不同穿刺轨迹进入卵圆孔。	If inadvertent violation of the mucosa occurs, the needle/cannula should be exchanged for a new one and a different submucosal tract used to enter the foramen.
颈内动脉损伤：在穿刺卵圆孔过程中，有三个进针位置可能会损伤颈内动脉和其他血管结构：1）针尖进入岩骨位置太靠后容易损伤C2段，2）进针位置太靠后外侧容易损伤C3段，3）进针操作太靠前内侧容易损伤C4段。	Injury to the Internal Carotid Artery: The internal carotid artery and other vascular structures can be injured by the needle in three locations while approaching the foramen: 1) The C2 segments as the needle tip enters the petrous bone too posteriorly, 2) The C3 segment if the needle is directed too posterolaterally, and 3) The C4 segment if the needle is navigated too anteromedially.
图2. 进针操作轨迹安全区（绿色）和危险区（橙色）（左图）。	Figure 2: The safe (green) and danger (orange) zones for navigating the trajectory of the needle (left image).
平行于穿刺针拍摄的术中X线斜位片显示左侧颈内动脉和颈静脉的大致位置（右图）。	The approximate locations of the left internal carotid artery and jugular vein are demonstrated on an oblique intraoperative X-ray obtained parallel to the needle (right image).
如果见到搏动性出血从穿刺针处喷出，应该拔出穿刺针并在咽后间隙采用手压止血。	If pulsatile arterial blood is seen ejecting from the needle, the needle should be removed and manual pressure applied at the posterior pharyngeal space.
中止手术并行CTA以排除动脉壁夹层和假性动脉瘤形成。	The procedure should be aborted and a CT angiogram performed to exclude the presence of an arterial wall dissection or pseudoaneurysm formation.
颅神经和颞叶损伤：穿刺针从卵圆孔前上成角进入可以使穿刺针直接进入眶下裂，触及三叉神经第2分支（Ⅴ2）。	Injury to the Cranial Nerves and Temporal Lobe: An angulated anterosuperior trajectory to the foramen can direct the needle to enter the inferior orbital fissure and contact the V2 division.
此外，穿刺针穿刺深度超过斜坡线可能损伤第Ⅳ和第Ⅵ颅神经。	Moreover, deep penetration of the needle beyond the clival line can injure cranial nerves (CN’s) IV and VI.
远外侧进针穿刺针可能进入硬膜下腔并损伤颞叶。	A far lateral trajectory can place the needle within the subdural space and injure the temporal lobe.
过度成角穿透眶下裂及在眶尖处损伤视神经也可能导致失明。	Blindness may also occur from excessive cranial angulation with penetration of the inferior orbital fissure and by directly traumatizing the optic nerve within the orbital apex.
心血管应激：当穿刺针或套管进入卵圆孔内时，约20%或更高比例的患者会出现三叉神经抑制反应。	Cardiovascular Stress: When the foramen ovale is engaged with a needle or cannula, a trigeminal depressor response occurs in about 20% or more of patients.
该反应会引起心动过缓和低血压或心动过速和高血压。	This response leads to bradycardia and hypotension or to hypertension and tachycardia.
这些症状也会发生在球囊压迫三叉神经根球囊膨胀过程中或当三叉神经根甘油注射时。	These abrupt cardiovascular changes also occur when the balloon is inflated during balloon compression or when glycerol is injected during a glycerol rhizotomy.
在准备不足的团队中，偶尔可能发生患者心脏骤停的情况。	If the team is not prepared, occasionally a patient may suffer cardiac arrest.
为应对这个风险，推荐术前使用阿托品或经皮起搏器。	To address this risk, premedication with atropine or placement of a transcutaneous pacemaker is recommended.
一些术者主张在卵圆孔附近进行局麻使心血管反应变得迟钝。	Some operators advocate administration of local anesthetic in the vicinity of the foramen to blunt the cardiovascular response.
感觉障碍：术后三叉神经感觉麻痹常见三叉神经根射频毁损和球囊压迫后，少见于甘油注射患者。	Sensory Disturbances: Postoperative trigeminal sensory numbness is quite common after radiofrequency and balloon compression rhizotomy and less common after glycerol rhizotomy.
目前认为这是一种副作用，而非并发症。	It is considered more of a side effect than a complication.
然而，角膜麻痹和后续的角膜炎在三叉神经根射频毁损和甘油注射患者中更为多见（10%），球囊压迫术后发生该症状的风险可以忽略不计。	However, corneal numbness and subsequent keratitis may be more common after radiofrequency and glycerol rhizotomy (10%), and its risk is considered negligible after balloon compression.
高达5%-10%接受毁损性治疗的患者可出现痛性感觉缺失或严重的阻滞性疼痛且难以治疗。	Anesthesia dolorosa or severe deafferentation pain can be seen in up to 5 to 10% of patients after any ablative treatment modality and is very difficult to treat.
因此，虽然轻度的感觉丧失是可以接受的，但明显的神经损伤导致严重的麻痹必须避免。	Therefore, although mild sensory loss is desirable, significant nerve injury leading to severe numbness must be avoided.
运动功能减退：咬肌无力几乎发生在所有球囊压迫三叉神经根术后患者，在三叉神经根射频毁损患者中很少见。	Motor Weakness: Masseter muscle weakness occurs postoperatively in virtually all patients undergoing balloon compression and in a minority of patients after radiofrequency rhizotomy.
咬肌无力大多为暂时性的，于几周内消失。	Masseter weakness is mostly transient and resolves in a few weeks.
但超过10%的患者可能会有长期的咀嚼困难。	However, more than 10% of patients may experience long-term mastication difficulties.
口唇疱疹：经皮三叉神经手术治疗后患者的口唇单纯疱疹有加重趋势，很常见，但通常很短暂。	Herpes Labialis: Herpes simplex labialis has a tendency to exacerbate after any percutaneous trigeminal procedure, and although this is common, it is usually transient.
水泡爆发于术后3-4天且自发性恢复。	Vesicular eruptions appear 3 to 4 days after the procedure and remit spontaneously.
有些外科医生主张预防性地应用阿昔洛韦。	Some surgeons advocate using acyclovir prophylactically.
根据一篇神经外科消融术治疗TN系统综述(Lopez et al., 2004)显示，三叉神经根射频毁损导致的累计并发症数量最高（29.2%），其次为甘油注射三叉神经根（24.8%）和球囊压迫（16.1%）。	According to a systematic review of ablative neurosurgical techniques for treatment of TN (Lopez et al. , 2004), radiofrequency rhizotomy is associated with the greatest number of cumulative complications (29.2%), followed by glycerol rhizotomy (24.8%), and balloon compression (16.1%).
然而，球囊压迫术导致的血管和神经损伤的发生率最高。	However, the risk of vascular and nerve injuries and meningitis was highest with balloon compression.
永久性的面部感觉丧失最常见于三叉神经根视频毁损术，影响了高达2/3患者的生活质量(Zakrzewska et al., 1999)。	Permanent facial sensory loss is most common after radiofrequency rhizotomy and can affect the quality of life in up to two-thirds of patients (Zakrzewska et al. , 1999).
疼痛控制率和复发率	Pain Control and Recurrence Rates
三叉神经根射频毁损：在一项包括1600例患者的研究中显示，初始疼痛缓解率高达97.6%，当患者行多次治疗后，60个月和180个月时疼痛完全缓解率分别为92%和97%（Kanpolat等, 2001）。	Radiofrequency Rhizotomy: Initial pain relief rates as high as 97.6% were reported in a study of 1,600 patients, with complete pain relief rates of 92% at 60 months and 97% at 180 months when patients were treated multiple times (Kanpolat et al. , 2001).
据一项系统综述显示，在所有经皮技术当中，三叉神经根射频毁损似乎有最高的持续性疼痛完全缓解率（Lopez等, 2004）。	According to a systematic review (Lopez et al. , 2004), radiofrequency rhizotomy seems to provide the highest rates of sustained complete pain relief among percutaneous techniques.
两项随访期分别为11.6年和14年的研究显示，射频毁损的复发率在7.8%至25%之间（Fraioli等, 2009, Taha等, 1995 ）。	Recurrence rates ranging from 7.8% to 25% at 11.6 and 14 years, respectively, were reported by two studies (Fraioli et al., 2009, and Taha et al., 1995).
Tronnier等研究显示，射频毁损的术后2年和4.5年的疼痛复发率分别为50%和75%（Tronnier等, 2001）。	Tronnier et al. reported a 50% rate of pain recurrence after 2 years and 75% after 4.5 years in patients who underwent radiofrequency rhizotomy (Tronnier et al., 2001).
整体上来说，相比于球囊压迫（Taha等，1996）或甘油注射（Lopez等，2004），三叉神经根射频毁损可以获得更长的无痛期和较低的复发率。	Overall, radiofrequency rhizotomy lesioning generally provides a longer duration of pain freedom and lower recurrence rate than either balloon compression (Taha et al., 1996) or glycerol rhizotomy (Lopez et al., 2004).
甘油注射三叉神经根：近期一项包括3370例患者的研究显示，初始疼痛缓解率在90%以上，随访23年后复发率为35%，多数患者（21%）在首次手术5年内复发（Xu-Hui等，1011）。	Glycerol Rhizotomy: A recent study of 3,370 patients revealed initial pain relief of 90%, with pain recurring in 35% over a period of 23 years, whereas most (21%) of these recurrences occurred within 5 years of the initial procedure (Xu-Hui et al., 2011).
其他研究报告显示，6个月和3年的疼痛完全缓解率分别在78%至88%和53%至53%（Slettebo等，1993，North等，1990）。	Other reports mention complete pain relief at 6 months and 3 years ranging from 78% to 88% and 53% to 54%, respectively (Slettebo et al., 1993, and North et al., 1990).
据Pollock（2005）研究，甘油注射过程中的痛感是唯一提示良好预后的显著性预测因素。	According to Pollock (2005), the only statistically significant predictor of positive treatment outcome was pain during glycerol injection.
甘油注射治疗效果在24个月后迅速下降（Lopez等，2004），与其他三种治疗方式相比，36个月后甘油注射治疗效果似乎是最差的。	The therapeutic effects of glycerol decreased rapidly after 24 months, and glycerol rhizotomy seemed to be the least beneficial of the three techniques at 36 months (Lopez et al., 2004).
据Tatli等（2008）研究显示，其复发率高达62%。	According to Tatli et al. (2008), the recurrence rate was highest after glycerol rhizotomy (62%).
球囊压迫：一项50例患者的研究显示，球囊压迫可以达到满意的初始疼痛缓解，缓解率为高达94%（Brown等，1993）。	Balloon Compression: Balloon compression offers excellent initial pain relief, with rates as high as 94% in a study of 50 patients (Brown et al., 1993).
精确地算，6个月和3年的疼痛完全缓解率分别为91%和69%。	Actuarial rates of complete pain relief were 91% and 69% at 6 months and 3 years, respectively.
就在最近，Asplund等报道了87例球囊压迫操作的初始疼痛缓解率为94%，中位无痛期为28个月。	More recently, Asplund et al. (2010) reported results from 87 procedures with an initial success rate of 94% and a median pain-free time of 28 months.
然而其复发率较高，（平均随访18个月的复发率为26%，Brown等，1993）。	Recurrence rates were high (average, 26% with a mean time to recurrence of 18 months; Brown et al., 1993).
虽然该手术可以重复进行，但再次压迫的结果（疼痛缓解的时间）无法（像第一次）持续那么长新的球囊压迫不能持续太长时间（Fraioli等，1989），因此成功率也会较低（Kouzounias等，2010）。	Although the procedure can be repeated, the results of a new compression are perhaps not likely to last as long (Fraioli et al., 1989), and the subsequent success rates may be lower (Kouzounias et al., 2010).
三叉神经痛的特点是：一侧三叉神经一个或多个分支区域内阵发性发作的急剧的、尖锐的刺痛，持续时间为1秒内至2分钟不等，可通过刺激特定的触发区引起。	Trigeminal neuralgia is characterized by paroxysmal attacks of unilateral, sharp, stabbing facial pain within one or more divisions of the trigeminal nerve, lasting 1 second to 2 minutes and precipitated by stimulation of certain trigger zones.
TN患者应该首选一线药物卡马西平治疗。	Medical treatment with carbamazepine should be the first line of treatment in patients with TN.
药物难治性TN患者应考虑MVD术或其他消融术。	Patients with TN refractory to medications are candidates for MVD surgery or other ablative procedures.
尽管MVD术疗效最佳，但患者年龄超过70岁或有相关合并症不能耐受开颅手术或长时间麻醉的，应考虑微创的经皮毁损术，如射频、甘油注射或球囊压迫三叉神经根。	Although MVD yields the most satisfactory results, patients older than 70 years or with associated prohibitive medical morbidities that preclude a craniotomy or lengthy anesthesia should be considered for less invasive, percutaneous ablative procedures such as radiofrequency, glycerol, or balloon compression rhizotomy.
安全有效穿刺卵圆孔是经皮治疗的关键。	Safe and efficient access to the foramen ovale is key to delivering an effective percutaneous treatment.
可以使用Hartel解剖学标志进入卵圆孔。	The foramen ovale can be accessed using Hartel’s anatomic landmarks.
术者应该注意其周围的神经血管结构，以免产生并发症。	The surgeon should be aware of the neighboring neurovascular structures to avoid complications.
三叉神经根射频毁损的优势是在毁损前可以对神经定位，但需要患者清醒和配合。	Radiofrequency rhizotomy has the advantage of mapping the nerve before lesioning, but requires an awake and cooperative patient.
与其他治疗相比，三叉神经根射频毁损可以有更长的持续性疼痛缓解及较低的复发率，但却有较高的并发症发生率。	Radiofrequency rhizotomy generally offers a longer duration of pain relief and lower recurrence rate than other techniques, but may carry a higher complication rate.
甘油注射三叉神经根可以获得良好的初始疼痛缓解率，但随时间推移其治疗效果逐渐减弱且有很高的复发率。	Glycerol rhizotomy offers excellent initial pain relief, but its effects wane over time and it has the highest recurrence rate.
球囊压迫治疗不影响角膜反射，是Ⅴ1单支病变的最佳选择。	Balloon compression is ideal for candidates with isolated V1-distribution TN since it spares the corneal reflex.
卵圆孔的定位与穿刺	Placement of Needle in the Foramen
卵圆孔的解剖变异和孔内骨脊的存在，使得在骨孔内放置穿刺针非常具有挑战性。	Placement of the needle within the foramen can be challenging because of variations of the foraminal anatomy and the presence of intraforaminal ridges.
因而，外科医生的经验是成功进行骨孔穿刺的重要因素。	The experience of the surgeon plays an important role in successful foraminal cannulation.
为了成功完成经皮神经根阻断术，需要采用Hartel技术对卵圆孔进行穿刺。	To complete a successful percutaneous rhizotomy, the foramen ovale must be accessed using Härtel’s technique.
所有的（三叉神经痛）经皮治疗方法，包括球囊压迫、射频毁损及甘油注射，均需Hartel技术。	This technique is used regardless of the percutaneous modality (balloon compression, radiofrequency lesioning, or glycerol rhizotomy).
以下分别讨论每种神经根阻断术的操作方法。	Performance of a rhizotomy via each modality is discussed separately.
以下图像显示的是卵圆孔相关解剖结构	The following images show the relevant anatomy of the foramen ovale.
图1：中颅窝底的骨性解剖结构。	Figure 1: Osseous anatomy of the middle cranial base.
注意卵圆孔和周围骨孔之间的位置关系，它的上面观（A）和下面观（B）。（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr授权）	Note the relationship of the foramen ovale to the surrounding foramina and its position when viewed from above (A) and below (B)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图2：翼上颌裂的斜视图。	Figure 2: An oblique view of the pterygomaxillary fissure.
注意卵圆孔（箭头）与翼突外侧板和下颌窝的位置关系。	Note the relationship of the foramen ovale (arrow) to the lateral pterygoid process and mandibular fossa.
如果穿刺针不是适当地采用由下往上的方向进针，垂直的卵圆孔后唇会阻碍其穿刺。（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr授权）	The vertical shape of the posterior lip of the foramen may complicate needle entry into the foramen if the needle does not enter the foramen at the appropriate inferior-to-superior trajectory (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图3：移除硬脑膜的骨膜层后切开右侧的Meckel囊和海绵窦。	Figure 3: The dissection of the Meckel’s cave and cavernous sinus on the right side after removing the periosteal layer of the dura mater.
放置穿刺针或套管至骨孔内侧能够让球囊、电极或甘油溶液充分接触三叉神经根并进入三叉神经池。	Placement of the needle or cannula on the medial section of the foramen allows the balloon, electrode, or glycerol solution to make the most contact with the trigeminal roots and enter the trigeminal cistern.
图4：卵圆孔周围的安全区和危险区。	Figure 4: The safe zones and danger zones along the periforaminal space.
绿色区域代表穿刺针可以反复探查颅底寻找骨孔的安全区。	The green zone defines the safe zones to “walk” the needle along the skull base to find the foramen.
橙色区域代表穿刺针有可能损伤颈内动脉或颈内静脉的危险区。	The orange zone defines danger zones where the carotid artery or jugular vein could be injured.
最好是瞄准穿刺针进入前方区域然后向后调整针尖直到穿进骨孔。	It is best to aim the needle to enter the region more anteriorly and then adjust the needle tip more posteriorly until the foramen is cannulated.
图5：左卵圆孔（虚线内）的X线斜视透射图，方向与穿刺针平行。	Figure 5: An oblique radiograph coaxial to the needle aimed at the left foramen ovale (within the dotted outline).
注意颈内静脉（蓝）和颈内动脉（红）与卵圆孔之间大概的相对位置。	Note the approximate locations of the internal jugular vein (blue) and the internal carotid artery (red) in relation to the foramen ovale.
手术室布置	Operating Room Setup
图6：经皮神经根阻断术的手术室布置。	Figure 6: The operating room setup for a percutaneous rhizotomy is shown.
医生位于患者患侧（本病例，左侧），助手位于头端以便X线透视时调整患者的头部位置。	The surgeon stands by the patient’s affected side (in this case, left side) and the surgical assistant stands at the head of the table to adjust the patient’s head during fluoroscopy.
麻醉医生位于医生对侧。	The anesthesia team is situated across from the surgeon.
刺激仪放于患者尾侧，电线藏于被单下面。	The stimulator apparatus is by the patient’s feet and cables are passed under the drapes.
带有图像增强效果的C形臂X线透视仪放于患者头部周围，当穿刺骨孔时，可以通过自由旋转机器来获得侧位片（右下图）和与穿刺针平行的斜位片（左下图）。	A C-arm fluoroscope with an image intensifier is placed around the patient’s head and can be rotated freely to obtain lateral (lower right image) and oblique views parallel to the needle’s long axis (lower left image) as the needle is advanced toward the foramen.
注意此过程中患者头部的位置，在获取侧方图像时，患者的头部是伸展的。	Note the position of the patient’s head during these two important imaging sequences; in the latter case, the head is extended.
X线图像显示屏放于医生对侧以便主刀和助手可以轻易看得到。	The X-ray viewer is placed across from the surgeon so both the surgeon and assistant can easily view the monitor.
患者体位	Patient Position
患者取仰卧位，颈部旋转15至20度。	The patient is placed supine on the operating table with a neck roll to achieve a 15- to 20-degree neck extension.
患者头部置于空心枕头上（甜甜圈枕）。	The patient’s head is placed in a hollow headrest (“donut gelrest”).
头颈部伸展过度会使手术医师偏离骨孔穿刺的标志。	More neck extension may disorient the surgeon regarding the landmarks for penetrating the foramen.
全身麻醉适用于球囊压迫和甘油溶液阻断神经根，因为这两种阻断方式并不像射频毁损神经根那样需要患者清醒或配合。	General anesthesia is administered for balloon compression and glycerol rhizotomies because, unlike radiofrequency lesioning, an awake or cooperative patient is not required for these procedures.
气管导管需要固定于患侧面部的对侧以保证术者的手在患者口内有足够的活动空间。	The endotracheal tube should be secured on the side contralateral to the affected side of the patient’s face to allow working room in the patient’s mouth for the surgeon’s hand.
对于行神经根射频毁损术的患者，由于需要患者在操作过程中保持清醒状态，只要轻微镇静即可。	For patients undergoing radiofrequency rhizotomy, only light sedation is used because the patient needs to be awake during portions of the procedure.
刺激过程中，为保证穿刺针的正确放置和准确定位局部射频毁损神经根病灶，患者的配合也是至关重要的。	Patient cooperation is critical during the stimulation phase to ensure correct needle tip placement and localization of the radiofrequency rhizotomy lesion.
由此可见，不合作的、过度焦虑的或认知功能受损的患者并不适合做神经根射频毁损术。	For this reason, uncooperative, overly anxious, or cognitively compromised patients are not suitable candidates for radiofrequency rhizotomy.
图7：使用Hartel解剖标志定位皮肤穿刺点和穿刺轨道。	Figure 7: Härtel’s anatomic landmarks are used for skin entry and needle trajectory.
局麻后，取嘴角外侧2.5cm处为穿刺点。	After injecting local anesthetic, the skin is entered 2.5 cm lateral to the corner of the mouth.
进针方向对着同侧瞳孔中部与外耳道前方2.5-3cm。	The needle trajectory is toward a point in line with the medial ipsilateral pupil and 2.5–3 cm anterior to the external auditory canal.
或者说，进针方向朝着两个平面相交处：一个为通过同侧瞳孔的矢状面（蓝），另一个为经过外耳道前方3cm的冠状面（绿）。	In other words, the needle trajectory is aimed at the intersection of two planes: one sagittal plane passes through the ipsilateral pupil (blue), and the other coronal plane (green) is 3 cm anterior to the external auditory canal.
笔者通过将手指放入口腔以确保进针过程中不会穿破颊粘膜，同时触摸翼突，因为骨孔位于此标志外侧。	I place my finger in the oral cavity to ensure that the buccal mucosa is not perforated during needle advancement and to palpate the pterygoid process since the foramen lies lateral to this landmark.
接着，作者触摸下颌骨然后在其内侧进针。	I palpate the mandible and advance the needle just medial to it.
使用牙垫防止手术医生的手指被咬伤。	A bite block may be used to avoid bite injury to the surgeon’s hand.
可以通过侧方和斜视方透视图改变进针方向以到达骨孔。	The needle trajectory may be altered using lateral and oblique fluoroscopic views to gain access to the foramen.
如果穿刺时无意中穿破颊粘膜，笔者会选择更换一个新的穿刺针，并使用不同的粘膜下通道达到骨孔，而不是终止操作。	If I inadvertently penetrate the mucosa with the needle, I exchange the needle for a new one and use a different submucosal tract to reach the foramen. I do not abort the procedure.
图8：通过将颅骨与患者的图片融合可见穿刺骨孔中参考的那些骨性解剖标志。	Figure 8: The skull bone is transposed on the patient’s image to illustrate the bony anatomic landmarks used to reach the foramen.
图9：穿刺针在侧方X线透视引导下抵到理想位置。	Figure 9: The needle is advanced to reach the ideal position on the lateral X-ray.
注意针尖定位于斜坡和岩骨的交界处。	Note that the tip of the needle is aimed at the junction of the clivus and petrous bone.
这是X线侧方透视图像中引导术者到达骨孔最重要的标志。	This is the most important landmark on the lateral fluoroscopic image guiding the surgeon to reach the foramen.
针尖抵到交界处，在穿透骨孔时应该停留在蝶骨平台下方5-15mm处。	The needle tip is advanced onto the junction and upon entering the foramen should rest between 5-15 mm below the sellar floor.
如果穿刺针没有对准岩骨斜坡交界处，需要重新定位。	If the needle is not aimed directly at the petrous-clival junction, the needle needs to be repositioned.
作者重新穿刺时，先撤出穿刺针到皮肤表面然后重新定位针尖。	During repositioning, I withdraw the needle to the skin level and redirect its tip.
如果穿刺针没有充分拔出就重新定位穿刺会导致粘膜回缩，导致针尖方向扭曲。	If the needle is not adequately withdrawn, repositioning will lead to retraction of the mucosae by the needle and resultant deflection of the needle tip.
这种情况会使骨孔穿刺失败。	This phenomenon will prevent reliable cannulation of the foramen.
图10：穿刺针的位置和术中侧方X线（透视插图）显示穿刺针在颅底岩斜交界处（箭头）的最终定位。	Figure 10: Location of the needle and an intraoperative lateral X-ray (inset) illustrating the final location of the needle near the skull base along the petrous-clival junction (arrow).
在穿刺针抵到颅底岩斜交界处的理想位置时，与穿刺针长轴同轴的斜位X线透视可引导针尖最后从外侧向内侧微调至穿透骨孔。	After the needle tip has reached the skull base at the desired junction of the clivus and petrous bone, an oblique X-ray with the projection of the X-ray beams coaxial to the long axis of the needle will guide the final minor lateral-to-medial needle tip adjustments to penetrate the foramen.
在此斜位片下，患者的头部是向对侧旋转45度角的，患者的颈部也是过伸的。	During this oblique imaging, the patient’s head is turned 45 degrees contralaterally and the patient’s neck is extended.
图11：调整C形臂以提供隧道视角，X线方向与穿刺针平行。	Figure 11: The C-arm is then rotated to offer a tunnel view and the X-rays are beamed in a coaxial manner parallel to the axis of the needle.
该图从斜角方向暴露了骨孔，保证准确地定位穿刺针和骨孔。	This view exposes the foramen at an oblique angle and allows exact localization of the needle tip in relation to the foramen.
经常地，可以通过对透视光束进行微调暴露骨孔的”正面”。	Most often, slight changes in the fluoroscopic beam are required to take a “face-on” image of the foramen.
这种方法有助于识别外侧下颌骨升支和内侧上颌骨之间的骨孔。	This methodology identifies the foramen between the ramus of the mandible laterally and the maxilla medially.
图12: X线斜位图示针尖恰好位于骨孔后方（左图，白箭头）；微调后确认穿刺针在骨孔内（右图）。	Figure 12: An oblique X-ray projection relatively parallel to the long axis of the needle demonstrates that the needle tip is just posterior to the foramen (white arrow, left image). Slight adjustment of the needle ensures that the needle is within the foramen (right image).
当穿入卵圆孔时，经常出现三叉神经抑制反应和咬肌、翼状肌收缩。	As the foramen ovale is engaged, a trigeminal depressor response and contraction of the masseter and pterygoid muscles are frequently elicited.
在较难穿刺的骨孔，这种收缩反应可以引导穿刺针沿着颅底安全的区域寻找骨孔。	In difficult-to-reach foramina, these responses can guide needle placement as I carefully “walk” the needle tip along the safe portion of the skull base to find the foramen.
一旦穿刺针进入骨孔，应该将它再穿入最多0.5cm的距离，直到侧面X线确认其位置。	Once the needle enters the foramen, it should be advanced only 0.5 cm until another lateral X-ray confirms the needle position.
移除探针后如果有脑脊液回流可以确认穿刺针在Meckel囊和半月池内。	Return of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) after removal of the stylet assures placement of the needle within the Meckel’s cave and Gasserian cistern.
这种确认方法并非保证探针位置所必需的，除了甘油注射三叉神经池外，术者也不应该坚持每个病例都要看见脑脊液回流。	This assurance is not required for confirmation of the needle tip location, and the operator should not insist on acquiring CSF in every case except in cases of glycerol injection into the trigeminal cistern.
当穿刺针斜面朝内时脑脊液流出可能性最大。	Chances of CSF flow are maximized with the needle hub facing medially.
卵圆孔内侧穿刺是最合适的，因为三叉神经的所有分支都可以和针接触得到。	Penetration of the medial aspect of the foramen ovale is also most desirable because all divisions of the trigeminal nerve can be contacted with this penetration.
外侧穿刺的话V1或V2分支可能与针接触不够充分。	Lateral needle placement may not allow adequate contact with V1 or V2 divisions.
穿刺针的最佳位置应该是在球囊或射频电极超出穿刺轨道顶端5-10mm。	Positioning of the needle should be done with anticipation that the balloon or radiofrequency electrode will extend 5-10 mm beyond the tip of the cannula.
图13: 穿刺针稍微向前穿入骨孔。	Figure 13: The needle is advanced slightly into the foramen.
侧方透视图确认穿刺针的最终位置超出颅底（左图）。	A lateral fluoroscopic image confirms the final location of the needle tip beyond the skull base (left image).
在球囊压迫神经根阻断病例中，如图所示将球囊在半月神经节池中充气（右图）。	In the case of a balloon compression rhizotomy, the balloon may be inflated within the Gasserian ganglion cistern as demonstrated (right image).
球囊的最终位置表明它轻微向圆孔扩展（蓝箭头）。	The final location of the balloon demonstrates the slight extension of the balloon into the foramen rotundum (blue arrow).
穿刺困难的骨孔	Difficult-to-Reach Foramen
在作者的经验中，有小部分患者（5%）的骨孔是很难在X线透视引导下通过粘膜下Hartel法穿刺成功的。	In my experience, there are a few patients (5%) whose foramen is difficult to cannulate through the submucosal Härtel’s method using fluoroscopy.
对于有严重面部骨折病史或颅面部畸形的患者，主刀医生术前应该使用CT扫描卵圆孔周围的颅底骨性结构以确认骨性标志没有改变。	Any history of significant facial fractures or craniofacial abnormalities should alert the operator to evaluate the bony skull base around the foramen ovale using a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan to ensure that bony landmarks, including the foraminal anatomy, are not altered.
作者常常发现常规的斜角穿刺骨孔实际上会使针尖触及骨孔后壁。	I often find that the usual oblique angle of needle entry into the foramen will in fact direct the needle tip toward the posterior lip of the foramen.
为此，穿刺针应该以更垂直的轨迹进入骨孔。	In this situation, the needle should be maneuvered and redirected to enter the foramen in a more inferior-to-superior trajectory.
然而，口腔黏膜可能会干扰穿刺针的重新定位导致其偏离正确位置。	The oral mucosa may interfere with this redirecting and deflect the tip of the needle away from the target.
因此，作者创造了一个不同的黏膜内通道以保证穿刺针按照目标轨迹穿行。	Therefore, I create a different tract within the mucosa to ensure that the needle tip follows my intended trajectory.
穿刺骨孔首先需要完善术前颅底CT扫描。	Prior difficulty with cannulating the foramen should also prompt a preoperative CT scan of the skull base.
骨化的翼棘或翼突韧带或其它骨孔内骨脊会妨碍穿刺成功。	Ossified pterygospinous or pterygoalar ligaments or other intraforaminal bony ridges across the foramen will complicate needle entry into the foramen.
因此，作者推荐使用术中导航定向准确地引导放置穿刺针。	In such situations, I stereotactically place the needle using intraoperative neuronavigation to accurately navigate the angle of needle penetration.
图14: 注意图中黑色箭头尖端所指的右侧卵圆孔内侧存在一骨脊（左图）；该骨脊会使穿刺针难以通过骨孔；术中CT导航下放置穿刺针（右图）。	Figure 14: Note the presence of a bony ridge along the medial aspect of the right foramen ovale at the tip of the black arrow (left image). This ridge will complicate cannulation of the foramen by the needle. Intraoperative CT-guided navigation assisted with placement of the needle in this patient (right image).
· 由于骨孔复杂的解剖结构，卵圆孔穿刺是困难的。	Entrance into the foramen ovale can be difficult because of wide variations in foraminal anatomy.
作者通过侧位的和斜位的透视图像引导穿刺针穿刺。	I use lateral and oblique fluoroscopic imaging to guide needle placement.
· 若患者有严重面部骨折病史或颅面部畸形，则需要术前CT扫描评估卵圆孔周围骨性结构以保证骨性标志包括骨孔解剖没有发生改变。	Any history of significant facial fractures or craniofacial abnormalities require an evaluation of the bony skull base around the foramen ovale using a preoperative CT scan to ensure that bony landmarks, including the foraminal anatomy, are not altered.
· 穿刺针不应该用力穿透颅底，因为其将会导致穿刺针位置不当和脑血管损伤。	The needle should not be forced to enter the skull base as this maneuver will lead to precarious needle locations and resultant cerebrovascular injury.
球囊压迫	Balloon Compression
球囊压迫治疗三叉神经痛的想法源于两位试图减压半月神经节的外科医生。	The idea that balloon compression can be used for treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (TN) originated from the works of two different surgeons who attempted to decompress the gasserian ganglion.
早在1952年，Taarnhöj通过颞下入路分离硬脑膜对10位患者的三叉神经节后根进行减压。	First, in 1952, Taarnhöj decompressed the posterior gasserian ganglion in 10 patients by dividing the dura through a subtemporal approach.
后来，Shelden和他的同事在更远处，即圆孔与卵圆孔处对神经进行减压。	Later, Shelden and colleagues decompressed the nerve more distally, at the foramina ovale and rotundum.
他们由此也得出一个猜想，认为疼痛缓解的主要原因是手术对神经节的损伤，而非减压。	This led to the hypothesis that the operative trauma to the ganglion, rather than decompression, is responsible for pain relief.
为了验证这个猜想，Shelden和他的同事率先开展半月神经节后根切断术，取得了理想的临床结果。	To test this hypothesis, Shelden and colleagues performed rhizotomies of the trigeminal retrogasserian root and published satisfactory results.
1983年，Mullan与Lichtor将这种开放式手术改进为经皮入路手术，在1996年，Brown将其进一步改进。	The open technique was transformed into the percutaneous technique by Mullan and Lichtor in 1983 and later modified by Brown in 1996.
通过人工或球囊压迫神经，损伤与疼痛相关的中等和粗大的有髓神经纤维，可保留小而细的有髓及无髓纤维。	Nerve compression, manually or by balloon, injures medium and large myelinated fibers while sparing small myelinated and unmyelinated fibers. This injury to the medium and large fibers is responsible for disruption of the ephaptic transmission of pain.
由于经皮球囊压迫术式可保留角膜反射，因此特别适用于三叉神经V1支疼痛。	Balloon compression is particularly useful in patients with V1 TN because of the ability of this percutaneous modality to preserve the corneal reflex.
由于该手术可导致暂时性甚至永久性（少见）的咬肌无力，对侧咬肌无力（Contralateral master weakness）也成为手术相对禁忌症。	Contralateral master weakness is a relative contraindication for this technique because balloon compression causes temporary and (rarely) permanent masseter weakness.
而对于双侧翼状肌或咬肌无力的患者则非禁用，因手术仅可能造成中度咀嚼功能障碍。	Bilateral pterygoid/masseter muscle weakness is not disabling, but it may cause moderate mastication dysfunction.
更多关于手术的指征、禁忌症以及不同经皮术式效果的细节，可以查阅三叉神经痛治疗总则一章。	For more details on indications, limitations, and outcomes of the different percutaneous procedures, please refer to the chapter on General Considerations and Indications.
手术过程	Operative Procedure
更多穿刺的细节请查阅卵圆孔穿刺一章。	Please refer to the chapter on Placement of the Needle within the Foramen Ovale for further details regarding cannulation of the foramen.
球囊压迫是笔者个人比较钟爱的经皮术式，不仅因为其在技术上的有效性，更因为无需患者的配合，可以将其麻醉，操作更为舒适。	Balloon compression is my preferred percutaneous procedure because it is technically efficacious and, more importantly, since patient cooperation is not required, the patient is anesthetized and comfortable.
在插管之后，经皮或经食道的心脏起搏器或复律器可用于应对可能发生的强烈的三叉神经抑制反应。	After intubation, a transcutaneous or transesophageal pacemaker or cardioversion device may be placed in anticipation of a strong trigeminal depressor response.
采用市面上常见的Mullan经皮穿刺微球囊压迫三叉神经节装置（Cook Medical, Bloomington）。	I use the commercially available Mullan Percutaneous Trigeminal Ganglion Microcompression Set (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN).
这套装置由穿刺针和套管、钝性针芯及微球囊导管组成。	This set consists of an access needle with stylet, a blunt obturator, and a microcompression balloon catheter.
另外，也可用包含套管的13或14号钝针并通过Hartel入路穿刺卵圆孔。	Alternatively, a 13- or 14-gauge blunt needle with a pointed noncutting stylet can be used and the foramen ovale is accessed using Hartel’s anatomic landmarks.
Figure 1：Mullan经皮穿刺微球囊压迫三叉神经节	Figure 1: The contents of the Mullan Percutaneous Trigeminal Ganglion Microcompression Set.
装置包括内套管穿刺针、钝性与锐性针芯、微球囊导管。	Note that the set includes an access needle with stylet, blunt and sharp obturators, and a microcompression balloon catheter.
做皮肤穿刺切口的手术刀片未在图中展示。	A small scalpel used to create a skin stab incision is not shown.
由于钝针的口径较大，不建议直接用针尖穿入皮肤。	Due to the large caliber of the blunt needle, direct entry through the skin with the needle tip is not advised.
Figure 2装置展示（上图）。	Figure 2: Another demonstration of the instruments (upper image).
标记在球囊导管上的远端与近端的黑线分别提示针尖处球囊的位置以及球囊最后的位置。	The relation of the distal and proximal black lines marked on the catheter to the hub of the access needle indicate the position of the balloon at the tip of the needle and its final position, respectively.
通常插入的导管比针尖深约17mm。	The catheter is usually inserted about 17 mm deeper than the needle tip.
Figure 3:针尖靠近颅底但未穿出卵圆孔（上图），	Figure 3: The needle tip is situated close to the skull base without exiting the foramen (top image).
碘海醇造影剂0.5ml缓慢充盈球囊，在X线引导下，观察球囊的充盈情况。	Using the syringe filled with the contrast agent iohexal, I then inflate the balloon slowly, under X-ray guidance, and watch for development of a pear-shaped balloon after 0.5 mL of contrast injection.
球囊位置向圆孔轻微扩展（下图蓝色箭头）。	The final location of the balloon demonstrates the slight extension of the balloon into the foramen rotundum (blue arrow, bottom image).
特征性的梨状外观表明球囊进入Meckel’s腔，其下方由岩骨围成，上方为硬脑膜缘。	Development of a pear-shaped balloon confirms correct placement of the balloon in the Meckel’s cave, bounded inferiorly by the petrous bone and superiorly by the dural edge.
Figure 4: 针尖抵达颅底卵圆孔（左图）；微球囊向三叉神经分支走向的眶上裂、圆孔和卵圆孔轻微扩张（右图箭头）。	Figure 4: In this patient, the location of the needle within the foramen is confirmed (left). Note the slight extension of the balloon into all three foramina of the trigeminal nerve (arrows, right).
最理想的球囊形状应为梨形外观。梨状球囊的囊内压力约为1000-1200mmHg，持续压迫约60-180s。	Once the pear shape of the balloon is confirmed, the balloon can then be inflated to a pressure of approximately 1,000 to 1,200 mm Hg and compression maintained for 60 to 180 seconds.
通常不必测囊内压，可通过注射器注入造影剂时阻力变化来大致判断囊内压（0.75-1ml）。	I usually do not measure the pressure and rather subjectively assess the development of resistance while injecting the contrast (0.75-1 ml) through the syringe.
一旦阻力大到无法继续注射就应停止，强行注射会导致球囊爆裂。	Once I feel a resistance against more injection, I stop because forceful injection leads to rupture of the balloon and the need for its replacement.
对再次手术患者，球囊压迫时间为120-180s。	The balloon is inflated for 120 to 180 seconds for patients who are undergoing repeat operations.
球囊压迫完成后，回抽造影剂排空球囊，并与穿刺针一并撤出，压迫穿刺点。	After the desired compression, the contrast material is suctioned back into the syringe, and the access needle and balloon catheter are removed in one piece. Pressure is applied to the skin puncture site.
拔管后，一些病人可能会有剧烈的烧灼痛，这种症状常在几个小时后自行缓解。	After extubation, some patients may experience severe, deep, burning pain, which usually subsides spontaneously within a few hours.
术后病人可在院观察24小时或当天出院回家。	Patients may be observed as inpatients for 24 hours or discharged home the same day.
· 穿刺卵圆孔时，针尖穿刺Meckel’s腔不宜过深，以免球囊过度充盈越过岩骨嵴进入后颅窝。	Upon penetrating the foramen, I do not advance the needle deep within the Meckel’s cave because a more shallow penetration keeps the inflated balloon within the Gasserian cistern and avoids its overinflation and displacement over the petrous ridge.
· 用于球囊压迫的穿刺针粗于射频和甘油注射治疗用针，穿刺造成的血管损伤风险较高。	Due to the larger caliber of the balloon compression access needle compared with the needles used for radiofrequency and glycerol rhizotomy, vascular injuries caused by the balloon compression access needle can potentially be more consequential.
慢性/亚急性硬膜下血肿	Chronic/Subacute Subdural Hematoma
虽然亚急性硬膜下血肿（sSDH）和慢性硬膜下血肿（cSDH）与急性硬膜下血肿（aSDH）三者均表现为相同潜在腔隙内的血液积聚。	Subacute subdural hematoma (sSDH) and chronic subdural hematoma (cSDH) are similar to acute subdural hematoma (aSDH) in that the accumulation of blood occurs in the same potential space.
但是它们在病程时长、出血原因、手术方案选择上不尽相同。	However, the timing of presentation, cause of hematoma, and surgical treatment options differ.
根据定义，此三者因头部外伤后发生血肿时间的不同而分类，急性（aSDH）、亚急性（sSDH）、慢性硬膜下血肿（cSDH）分别指头部外伤后72小时内，4~14天内、14天及14天以上所出现的硬膜下血肿。	By definition, aSDH presents within 72 hours of the initial trauma, whereas sSDH presents within 4 to 14 days after head trauma, and cSDH presents 14 days or more after trauma.
sSDH与cSDH因其发生时间较晚，血肿内水分含量更多，所以外科处理方式不同于aSDH。	This time delay present in subacute and chronic SDHs causes the hematoma to become more liquid, allowing for different surgical techniques.
临床表现	Presentation
尽管典型的aSDH由外伤引起，但cSDH患者也常有各种外伤史。	Although aSDH is typically the result of forceful trauma, a patient presenting with cSDH may report a variety of trauma histories.
有些患者外伤史明确，有些外伤史不明确，另一些患者甚至缺乏外伤史。	The trauma may be well defined, seemingly innocuous, or even absent.
实际上，据报道约有40~50%的cSDH患者无外伤史。	In fact, approximately 40% to 50% of patients with cSDH report no history of trauma.
cSDH的其他病因包括药物，如抗凝药或抗血小板药的使用，以及非常罕见的的基础疾病，例如血管畸形、蛛网膜囊肿、硬脑膜肉瘤及脑膜炎。	Nontraumatic causes of cSDH include the use of medications, such as anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents, and certain rare underlying conditions, such as vascular malformations, arachnoid cysts, dural sarcomas, and meningiomas.
慢性硬脑膜下血肿在老年人及酗酒者中更为常见。	Chronic subdural hematoma is more common in the elderly and in those with a history of alcoholism.
典型cSDH患者可出现以下一种或多种症状：如头痛、共济失调、意识模糊以及失语。	Patients with cSDH typically present with one or more of the following symptoms: headache, gait ataxia, confusion, and aphasia.
若血肿体积较大，可能造成显著的占位效应，最终导致轻瘫、癫痫或昏迷。	Larger hematomas may cause significant mass effect, leading to paresis, seizures, or coma.
诊断及评估	Diagnosis and Evaluation
尽管cSDH在MR及CT上均可发现，但目前仍将CT作为金标准。	Although cSDH can be visualized on both magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and computed tomography (CT) scans, CT imaging is considered the gold standard.
CT在检测血肿的发生和评估其发生时间方面具有优势，并且价格低廉、扫描快速、适用性广泛。	CT has a superior capability to detect hematomas and estimate their age, in addition to a lower cost, quicker time for scanning, and wider availability.
另外，很多老年患者体内可能含有植入物，不适合行MR检查。	In addition, many elderly patients have implants that may preclude MR imaging.
非增强CT不仅用于识别cSDH的存在，也用于明确血肿形成时间，这对选择术式有意义重大。	Noncontrast CT scans are not only useful for identifying the presence of a cSDH, but also in determining the age of the hematoma, which is a significant factor in selection of the specific surgical treatment.
与正常脑组织相比，aSDH表现为高密度，sSDH表现为等密度，而cSDH则表现为低密度。	Compared with normal brain tissue, an aSDH appears hyperdense, sSDH appears isodense, and cSDH appears hypodense.
这种密度上的差别是由于血肿成分随时间演变而造成的。	These differences in density occur due to the evolving composition of the hematoma.
血肿通常包含一种主要成分，但同时伴有多种其他成分。	It is not unusual that one form of the hematoma predominates but other forms are also concurrently present.
随着时间的推移，血肿的液体含量逐渐增多，导致其在CT上表现为低密度。	As the hematoma ages it becomes more liquid, causing it to appear less dense on CT scans.
这种血液粘度的变化也使得外科干预措施有所变化。	This change in viscosity also accounts for the differences in surgical intervention.
确诊一般无需加做增强CT，但是，对于等密度的亚急性硬膜下血肿，增强CT可准确显示血肿边界。	The use of contrast is generally not needed in order to make a proper diagnosis; however, contrast may be beneficial in visualizing the exact borders of isodense sSDHs.
图1. 图示左侧额叶sSDH的CT影像，病变呈等密度。	Figure 1: These CT scans show an isodense sSDH of the left frontal lobe.
红色箭头标注了血肿的边界。由于其与大脑正常组织密度相仿，因此较难判断。	The red arrows highlight the boundaries of the hematoma because it is isodense compared with the brain and therefore potentially difficult to readily identify.
另外，此CT展示了SDH的占位效应导致的中线偏移。	Additionally, these CT scans demonstrate mass effect from the SDH causing midline shift.
图2. 图示一慢性、亚急性混杂SDH。	Figure 2: A mixed chronic and subacute SDH is demonstrated.
请注意位于后方的亚急性血肿。	Note the posterior subacute component of the hematoma.
图3. 左图示急性SDH（高密度区），右图示慢性SDH（低密度区）。	Figure 3: Acute (hyperdense, left) and chronic (hypodense, right) SDHs are included.
请注意慢性SDH所形成的腔隙间隔，这使得钻孔完全引流血肿的难度增大。	Note the septations within the cSDH that can potentially complicate complete drainage of the hematoma via burr holes.
cSDH是否可采取保守治疗仍有争议。	Treatment of cSDH with nonsurgical methods is controversial.
无症状、无显著占位效应的小血肿可停用抗凝药物进行期待治疗。	Asymptomatic small hematomas with no significant mass effect may undergo expectant therapy with discontinuation of anticoagulation medications.
一段时间后复查CT一般可显示血肿体积减小。	Repeat scans performed at intervals document reduction in the size of the hematoma.
若占位效应无明显改善，则需行外科治疗。	Surgical evacuation is necessary if resolution of the mass effect is not apparent.
尽管一些研究提示，单纯地塞米松治疗而不行外科干预也对慢性或亚急性SDH有效；但是临床证据表明该方法无效或者会延长患者住院时间。	Although some studies have suggested that dexamethasone therapy may be effectively used to treat c/sSDHs without surgical intervention, typically, medical management either proves ineffective or requires extensive hospitalization.
例如，轻度言语障碍或轻偏瘫、无明显中线移位的中等大小硬膜下血肿患者若有明显麻醉禁忌，可试行短程地塞米松治疗。	For example, patients with moderate-size hematomas without significant midline shift who suffer from mild dysphasia or hemiparesis may undergo a short course of dexamesathone therapy if anesthetic risks are significant.
一般而言，对于有明显占位效应的cSDH患者来说，外科干预是更可靠的选择。	In general, surgical management is a more reliable option for patients presenting with cSDH causing significant mass effect.
因为根据报道，主诉无特异性急性症状的患者可能出现急性代偿失调和小脑幕疝，因此，表现为显著占位效应、中线移位和剧烈头痛的患者，应急诊行血肿清除术。	Patients who present with significant mass effect and midline shift and suffer from severe headaches should undergo urgent evacuation because acute decompensation and transtentorial herniation has been reported among patients complaining of nonspecific acute symptoms.
CT扫描可明确患者的cSDH为单侧或是双侧。	Evaluation of the CT scan will reveal whether the cSDH is unilateral or bilateral.
尽管大多数cSDH是单侧的，但仍有16%到25%的病人具有双侧cSDH。	Although the majority of cSDHs are unilateral, 16% to 25% of patients present with bilateral cSDHs.
如果为双侧病变，两侧的cSDH需在同一时间处理。	If bilateral, both cSDHs may need to be treated at the same time.
若仅行单侧引流，则会使对侧的腔隙增大。	Unilateral evacuation may lead to expansion of the contralateral one.
但如果对侧SDH体积相对较小，可以考虑行单侧引流。	If the contralateral SDH is relatively small, unilateral treatment is reasonable.
如果血肿内含有少量急性出血成分，虽然钻孔引流并非禁忌，但是建议将颅孔策略性地设计于急性出血部位。	If the hematoma contains a small amount of acute blood products, burr holes are not contraindicated, but strategic placement of the holes over the acute components is recommended.
慢性/亚急性硬膜下血肿清除术	SURGICAL EVACUATION OF CHRONIC/SUBACUTE SUBDURAL HEMATOMA
清除慢性硬膜下血肿可有数种术式，如钻孔引流术（单孔或双孔）（burr hole(s) drainage），锥颅引流术（twist drill craniostomy）、骨窗开颅术（small craniotomy）。其中，笔者认为双孔法钻孔引流术最为有效。	Although there are several surgical methods used for evacuation of cSDHs, such as burr hole(s) drainage, twist drill craniostomy, and small craniotomy, I find burr-hole drainage via two burr holes to be the most effective technique.
使用双孔而不是单孔的原因在于，使用单孔可能导致血肿不能完全清除，尤其是sSDH。	The use of two burr holes rather than only one is imperative because evacuation via a single burr hole may lead to subtotal removal of the hematoma, especially in sSDH.
笔者常规放置硬膜下引流管（术后1~2天拔除），若术中受压脑组织复位致使硬膜下腔消失，则可省略这一步骤。	I routinely implant a subdural drain (to be continued for 1 to 2 days after surgery), but may forego this step if the brain expands intraoperatively to obliterate the subdural space.
根据手术医生的偏好及患者的承受能力选择麻醉方式，全麻或清醒镇静麻醉均可。	General anesthesia or conscious sedation may be used, depending on the surgeon’s preference and the patient’s tolerance.
患者取仰卧位，头部垫马蹄形头枕。	The patient is placed in the supine position and the head is placed on a horseshoe-shaped headrest.
如果患者的cSDH为单侧，则将患者头部向对侧倾斜约30°；	If the cSDH is unilateral, the patient’s head should be tilted approximately 30 degrees toward the contralateral side.
若cSDH为双侧，则取正位。	If the cSDH is bilateral, the head is kept in the neutral position.
图4：图示右侧单侧亚急性/慢性硬膜下血肿患者的准确体位摆放。	Figure 4: Proper patient positioning for evacuation of a unilateral right-sided subacute or chronic subdural hematoma is shown.
图中已标记患者头颅中线及2处头皮切口。	Both the midline and the two incision sites are marked.
切口位置可根据血肿最厚部位做轻微调整。	The location of the maximum thickness of the hematoma may slightly alter the incision sites.
完成两处头皮切口后，笔者使用2个小号乳突撑开器暴露颅骨。	After both incisions are completed, I use two small mastoid retractors to expose the skull.
钻孔后十字型打开硬脑膜，从而引流血肿。	Two large burr holes are created using the perforator drill, and the dura is opened in the cruciate fashion. These maneuvers allow the hematoma to be drained.
此外，在硬膜下腔使用大量冲洗液冲净血肿的固体成分。	Furthermore, ample amounts of irrigation within the subdural space will displace the more solid components of the hematoma.
在双孔引流中，一孔进入的冲洗液从另一颅孔流出时可充分冲刷出血凝块。	The two-burr technique allows effective irrigation through the anterior hole with evacuation of the clot through the posterior hole and vice versa.
持续冲洗直到冲洗液清亮。	The irrigation process is continued until the irrigant becomes clear upon return via both burr holes.
图5：上方插画及术中照片显示了大量冲洗液经双孔清除硬膜下血肿的过程。	Figure 5: The above illustration and intraoperative photo demonstrate evacuation of a subacute subdural hematoma through the two-burr-hole technique using an ample amount of irrigation.
术中采用冲洗器将冲洗液从前孔注入，血凝块等固体成分即可随之从后孔流出。	The bulb irrigator is used through the anterior burr hole to displace the more solid components of the clot into the posterior burr hole.
顶部插画显示了硬膜下血肿随冲洗液的下移过程，底部照片则展现了术者视角。	The top illustration demonstrates the movement of the hematoma subdurally, while the bottom image shows the surgeon’s perspective.
笔者会通过颅孔检查脑部表面，小心打开较易触及的血肿分隔，使冲洗液顺利通过。	I inspect the surface of the brain through the burr holes and carefully attempt to fenestrate the easily reachable septations to allow free flow of the irrigant between the anterior and posterior burr holes.
如果脑表面尚不可见，则需要在确保安全的前提下通过有限的暴露野，对分隔进行谨慎分离。	If the surface of the brain is not visible, the septations should be further fenestrated through the limited exposure if this maneuver is deemed safe.
若脑组织向颅骨移位则提示预后良好，也表明血肿已被彻底清除。	The movement of the brain toward the calvarium is a good prognostic factor, another confirmation that the hematoma has been adequately evacuated.
但凡有任何硬膜下腔轻微静脉渗血的迹象，术者都应耐心地经颅孔进行轻柔的冲洗处理。	Any evidence of mild venous ooze within the subdural space is managed via gentle irrigation through the burr holes and operator’s patience.
笔者不建议通过常规使用红色橡胶导管来去除硬膜下腔内不可触及的凝血块，从而加速血肿的清除。	I do not routinely use a red rubber catheter in the subdural space to dislodge unreachable clots and facilitate hematoma evacuation.
当冲洗液变得相对清亮时，笔者会经前颅孔在硬膜下腔向后颅孔方向置入9号圆形Jackson-Pratt引流管，此时需注意避免损伤软脑膜。	Once the irrigant returns relatively clear, I place a size-9 round Jackson-Pratt drain in the anterior burr hole inserted toward the posterior burr hole in the subdural space, making sure to avoid injury to the pia.
引流管经皮下隧道潜行穿出后，以皮钉固定或与头皮缝合，避免引流管脱落移位。	The drain is then tunneled subcutaneously, and the external portion is stapled/sutured to the scalp to minimize the risk of delayed displacement.
图 6：如图所示，经前颅孔放置引流管并与头皮固定。	Figure 6: Placement of a drain through the anterior burr hole and its fixation to the scalp is shown.
上图示引流管如何在皮下潜行，下图示如何使用皮钉将引流管与头皮充分固定。	The upper photo demonstrates how the drain is tunneled subcutaneously, while the bottom photo shows how the drain is stapled to the scalp to achieve adequate fixation.
术后第一天常规复查CT，明确血肿是否成功清除。	A postoperative CT scan can confirm the successful evacuation of a cSDH and is typically performed the day after the operation.
若影像学提示血肿已充分清除，可拔除引流管。	If the hematoma is adequately evacuated, the drain is discontinued;
这样可防止脑脊液的过度引流，并降低并发远处颅内出血的风险。	this maneuver avoids overdrainage of the cerebrospinal fluid and the risk of one or more remote intracerebral hemorrhages.
值得注意的是，硬膜下腔残余积液的情况并不罕见，但该液体的密度值与术前CT所示血肿的密度值不同。	Note that residual fluid in the subdural space is not uncommon, but this fluid has a different density shown on imaging compared with the hematoma shown on preoperative imaging.
若有新的症状出现，可考虑术后数天再次复查CT。	Repeat scans several days after surgery should also be considered if new symptoms develop.
术后24h患者常规接受抗生素治疗，术后一周接受抗癫痫药物治疗。	Postoperatively, the patient should receive antibiotics for the next 24 hours, as well as anticonvulsants for a week following surgery.
若患者术前平素服用抗凝药物，术后不可立即恢复用药，需待影像学检查示硬膜下血肿完全或大部分消失后才可恢复用药。	If the patient was on anticoagulant medications before surgery, these should be held and not resumed until imaging suggests that all or most subdural collections have resolved.
尽管cSDH血肿清除术属于神经外科手术中常见且难度相对较低的类型，但我们仍需关注术后处理，降低血肿复发率。	Although surgical evacuation of cSDH is a common and relatively simple neurosurgical procedure, proper postoperative care is essential to reduce the chance of recurrence.
大约8%~16%的慢性硬膜下血肿患者在术后1周及1周后可复发。	Chronic subdural hematomas recur in approximately 8% to 16% of patients 1 week or more after the initial evacuation.
由于cSDH好发于老年群体，故需特别关注患者的既往健康状况，尤其应对抗凝药物的使用进行评估，选择适当的时机恢复用药，以此降低复发风险。	Since the majority of patients who develop cSDH are elderly, it is imperative that the patient’s preexisting conditions and, more specifically, anticoagulant medications are carefully evaluated and resumed appropriately in order to minimize the risk of recurrence.
笔者通常会安排患者术后1月时复查CT以评估血肿的消散情况。	I usually obtain another CT scan 1 month following surgery to assess the rate of resolution of the hematoma.
若患者血肿几乎完全消散，则可考虑恢复术前常规应用的抗凝药物。	Patients who demonstrate an almost complete resolution of their hematoma are candidates for reinstitution of their preoperative anticoagulation medicine(s).
慢性硬膜下血肿的开颅手术指征	Indications for Craniotomy for Chronic Subdural Hematoma
分隔严重的慢性/亚急性硬膜下血肿及普通钻孔引流效果不佳者可考虑经额颞部小骨窗行血肿清除术。	Highly loculated chronic/subacute hematomas and those that are refractory to evacuation via burr holes are reasonable candidates for a small frontotemporal craniotomy and “open” removal of the hematoma with marsupialization of hematoma membranes.
若硬膜下血肿的分隔及小腔与周围神经、血管结构无粘连，可予以切除。	The loculations and septations are removed if they are not adherent to the surrounding neurovascular structures.
由于大多数分隔可延伸至颅骨边缘侧，故打开骨窗时大部分分隔已被横断。	Most of these septations are transected at the periphery of the bony opening as they extend well beyond the craniotomy edges.
并发症的避免	Complication Avoidance
尽管患者入院就诊时可没有相对明显的神经功能障碍，但占位效应显著的巨大硬膜下血肿可导致突发的不可逆转的急性神经功能失代偿。	Large subdural hematomas with significant mass effect can lead to an unexpected acute irreversible neurological decompensation despite the relatively nonremarkable neurological deficits at the time of initial admission.
在病情恶化时行急诊引流术可能无法改善患者术后的神经功能恢复情况。	Emergent decompression at the time of deterioration may not lead to postoperative neurological recovery.
因此，对于无明显症状但占位效应显著的患者，应采取及时紧急的处理。	Therefore, timely and emergent management of the relatively asymptomatic lesions with significant mass effect is highly advised.
图7：这是一名不幸的年轻外院男性患者，仅表现为轻度的意识障碍（第一行图片，注意其右上角图像显示的早期脑疝征象）。	Figure 7: This unfortunate and relatively young male presented with only mild confusion (top row images-note the early sign of brain herniation-right upper image) to an outside institution.
考虑到患者平素规律服用阿司匹林，并有输注血小板的可能，手术被推迟至第二天进行。	Surgery was postponed to the next day due to the patient's regular use of the aspirin and the presumed need for platelete infusion.
但该患者在第二天早晨病情突然恶化，遂于急诊行钻孔引流术。	This patient acutely deteriorated next morning and underwent emergent burr hole decompression.
虽然血肿被充分清除，但由于患者术前突发脑疝可能导致了大脑弥漫性缺血（底行图片）。	Despite adequate hematoma evacuation, it is apparent that preoperative cerebral herniation immediately before surgery most likely led to diffuse cerebral ischemia (bottom row images).
患者最终死亡。	The patient subsequently expired.
尽管所有的SDHs血液均积聚在相同的解剖腔隙，亚急性/慢性SDHs在血肿发生时间、外伤史、手术方案等方面与急性SDHs不尽相同。	Although all SDHs are associated with accumulation of blood within the same anatomic space, the time until presentation, strength of trauma history, and surgical treatment of s/cSDHs are different from aSDHs.
对于亚急性/慢性SDHs，双孔法钻孔引流术是最有效的手术方式。	Hematoma evacuation through two burr holes is the most efficient and effective surgical treatment for s/cSDHs.
对侧纵裂经大脑镰经楔前叶入路	Contralateral Interhemispheric Transfalcine Transprecuneus Approach
总则	General Considerations
经后纵裂开颅可以利用纵裂的天然间隙，到达中线深部大脑镰旁和脑室旁区。	The posterior interhemispheric craniotomy provides access to deep midline parafalcine and paraventricular spaces through the natural interhemispheric fissure.
虽然利用该自然空间具有诸多利好，比如减少脑组织的牵拉和损伤，但是操作空间深窄，导致手术技术难度大。	Although working in this natural plane has numerous benefits, such as a minimal need for brain retraction and transgression, the working corridor can be deep and narrow, making surgery in this region technically challenging.
到达并暴露脑室三角部/房部周围区域具有特殊的挑战性。	The reach to expose the peritrigonal/atrial territories poses special challenges.
高度功能化的表层皮质，白质纤维束如侧脑室外侧的视辐射，外侧和浅表的中央后回，前下方的丘脑，都限制了到达房部的手术通道。	The highly functional overlying cortices and white matter tracts such as the optic radiations lateral to the ventricle, postcentral gyrus laterally and more superficially, and the thalamus anteroinferiorly, constrain the surgical corridors to the atrium.
而标准的纵裂入路或经皮层入路都需要用力牵拉并切除部分正常脑组织。	Standard interhemispheric or transcortical approaches involve significant retraction and resection of the normal parenchyma.
我们同事常采用以下到达房部的手术入路，均需要对脑组织进行侵入性操作：前下颞叶切开，后下颞叶切开，海马旁回切开，中线旁后顶叶切开，矢状窦旁切开和扣带回切开。	Our colleagues have described the following trajectories to access the atrium that require brain transgression: the anterior-inferior temporal resection, the posterior-inferior temporal resection, the parahippocampal resection, the paramedian posterior parietal resection, the parasagittal resection and cingulate resection.
笔者则采用对侧后纵裂经大脑镰经楔前叶入路（posterior interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach，PITTA）以暴露房部，该入路具有一定的优势，能提供灵活多变的操作角度，以扩大手术通道，并减少对同侧脑组织的牵拉。	I have used the contralateral posterior interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach (PITTA) to the atrium that provides several benefits. The PITTA offers flexible working angles to expand the operative corridor and minimal ipsilateral brain manipulation.
图1：对于向外侧延伸的病灶，对侧经大脑镰斜行手术通路能提供更加灵活的操作角度（绿色区域）。	Figure 1: The contralateral transfalcine cross-court corridor (green zone) affords more flexible working angles for lesions that extend laterally.
相比同侧经纵裂入路（红色区域），能够减少对同侧脑组织的牵拉，更容易到达肿瘤的外侧极（上图）。	This modification of the ipsilateral interhemispheric route reduces retraction on the ipsilateral hemisphere (red zone) while reaching the lateral pole of the tumor (top).
第二张图（下图）展示了该改良入路的技术细节。	An overview of the technical details for this modifed route is described in the second illustration (bottom).
图2：在工作生涯的早期，笔者采用同侧经纵裂入路处理房部内侧的低级别胶质瘤。	Figure 2: Early in my career, I approached this low-grade glioma of the medial atrial wall through the ipsilateral interhemispheric route.
受限于肿瘤外侧面的操作角度，仅对肿瘤进行了部分切除。	Due to the limited working angle along the lateral pole of the tumor, I achieved only a subtotal resection.
通过回顾该病例，萌生了PITTA的雏形。	The PITTA evolved from my critical review of the experience in this case.
在该章节，将强调通过改良对侧经纵裂入路切除累及房部和内侧壁病灶的细微差别。	In this chapter, I will highlight the nuances of the PITTA for resection of the lesions affecting the atrium and its medial wall through optimizing the interhemispheric contralateral approach.
手术指征	Indications for the Approach
笔者采用PITTA入路处理局限于房部内侧壁和侧脑室三角区的肿瘤和血管性病变。	I use PITTA to approach tumors and vascular lesions confined to the medial wall of the atrium and within the trigone of the ventricle.
图3：房部内侧壁和三角区的胶质瘤（左上图），脑膜瘤（左下图）和动静脉畸形（右图），均可采用PITTA入路（包括术后影像）。	Figure 3: Gliomas (left upper images), meningiomas (left lower images), and arteriovenous malformations (right images) of the medial atrial wall and trigone are reasonable candidates for the PITTA (postoperative images are included).
如果肿瘤从房部周围区域向前方延伸至透明隔，或者主要累及房部的外侧壁，则不适合该入路。	Tumors that extend anteriorly into the diencephalon from the periatrial region or predominantly involve the lateral wall of the atrium are not reasonable candidates for this route.
该区域的病灶往往会影响患者视力，因此需完善术前视野检查。	Lesions in this location may affect the patient’s vision, so a preoperative visual field evaluation is warranted.
然而，该区域大部分病灶表现为非特异性症状和体征。	However, most lesions in this location present primarily with nonspecific symptoms and signs and are rare.
由于PITTA无法到达脑脊液（cerebrospinal fluid，CSF）池减压，因此术中脑脊液引流有利于松弛脑组织，扩大经纵裂手术通道，避免用固定脑拉对正常大脑半球进行牵拉。	Intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage facilitates brain relaxation and expands the interhemispheric corridor because the CSF cisterns are not accessed during the PITTA. This maneuver obviates the need for fixed retractors on the normal hemisphere.
笔者一般会选择腰大池置管引流。	A lumbar drain is my method of choice for this purpose.
在开颅和打开硬膜后，通过腰大池缓慢释放约50-60ml的CSF（每次10-15ml）。	Approximately 50-60 cc of CSF is gradually (in 10-15 cc aliquots) removed through the lumbar drain during the craniotomy and after the dural opening.
在术前磁共振影像上，应评估上矢状窦和上顶叶表面桥静脉的情况。如果需要，可行磁共振静脉造影（magnetic resonance venogram，MRV）或CT血管造影（computed tomography angiogram，CTA）。	The superior sagittal sinus and corresponding bridging veins over the superior parietal lobule should be evaluated on preoperative magnetic resonance images,  and if necessary, a magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) or computed tomography angiogram (CTA) should be performed.
该区域内矢状窦旁桥静脉较少，	The parasagittal bridging veins are often sparse in this region.
然而牺牲任何大静脉，会导致严重静脉性梗死的后果。	However, the risk of significant venous infarction with ligation of any large vein persists.
暴露房部后部需要切开直窦附近的大脑镰，因此，术前对该关键硬脑膜静脉窦的评估也是非常重要的。	Exposure of the posterior aspect of the atrium requires an incision within the flax that can be close to the straight sinus.  Therefore, preoperative evaluation of this vital dural venous sinus is also important on imaging.
如果该区域对侧大脑半球的矢状窦表面存在大量粗大的引流静脉，则不推荐静脉结扎和PITTA入路。相反，可采用经顶上小叶皮层入路。	If there are numerous large parasagittal veins draining into the sagittal sinus overlying the contralateral hemisphere in the region, it would be ill-advised to use the PITTA and ligate these veins; instead, a transcortical approach through the superior parietal lobule is warranted.
在采用PITTA入路时，熟悉并掌握矢状窦旁静脉解剖结构非常重要。	An understanding of the parasagittal venous anatomy is important for execution of this approach.
图4：顶上小叶附近的静脉解剖和变异特点。	Figure 4: The venous anatomy and its variations around the superior parietal lobule.
尽管该区域的矢状窦旁静脉比较稀少，一些大脑半球上仍然会有不能牺牲的Trolard静脉复制体（E）。	Although the parasagittal veins are frequently sparse in this location, there are hemispheres where the non-dispensable duplicate forms of vein of Trolard are present (E).
此外，在顶上小叶前方和后方往往会有粗大的引流静脉，尤其是在Labbe静脉缺失的情况下（黄箭头，F）（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr授权）。	In addition, there are often large veins just anterior and posterior to the superior parietal lobule region, especially in the absence of the vein of Labbe (yellow arrow, F)(Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图5：经纵裂到达侧脑室房部的冠状位解剖图。	Figure 5: A view of the coronal section to the atrium through the interhemispheric fissure.
已去除部分右侧顶上小叶（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr授权）。	A portion of the right parietal lobe is removed (Image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
图6：房部的形态和脉络丛所在的位置。	Figure 6: The morphology of the atrium and the location of the choroid plexus are demonstrated.
对脉络丛组织过度操作和/或电凝，会导致部分脑组织缺血和视野缺损（图片由AL Rhoton，Jr授权）。	Aggressive manipulation and/or coagulation of the choroid plexus can lead to ischemic lesions and dense visual field deficits (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
对侧后纵裂经大脑镰经楔前叶入路	POSTERIOR INTERHEMISPHERIC CONTRALATERAL TRANSFALCINE TRANSPRECUNEUS APPROACH
图7：患者取公园躺椅位，正常大脑半球位于下垂位。	Figure 7: The patient is placed in the park-bench position with the normal unaffected hemisphere in the dependent position.
该体位可利用重力作用，使得下方大脑半球远离中线。	This maneuver allows gravity retraction to mobilize the dependent (contralateral) hemisphere away from the midline.
导航用于设计手术切口和骨瓣，以避开矢状窦旁静脉，定位大脑镰切口和楔前叶皮质切开的位置。	Navigation is used for planning the incision and craniotomy to avoid parasagittal veins as well as designing the falcine incisions and precuneus corticotomy.
一般在顶结节后方做线形切口（右图）。	The incision is typically linear and just behind the parietal bossing (right image).
注意半球间的手术通道恰好位于两条重要的桥静脉上。	Note the interhemispheric operative corridor is situated between two important bridging veins.
旋转患者头部，使得中线轴（矢状缝）与地面呈45度角。	The patient’s head is rotated so that the axis of the midline (sagittal suture) is at a 45-degree angle to the floor.
图8：开颅暴露上矢状窦。	Figure 8: The craniotomy exposes the width of the superior sagittal sinus.
选择合适的硬膜切开位置，保护矢状窦旁静脉（左侧小图）。	The dural opening should be adjusted to preserve the parasagittal veins (right image, inset).
小心游离这些静脉，以增加大脑半球间的操作通道（右图）。	These veins are untethered in order to increase the working zone through the interhemispheric corridor (right image).
图9：用两根缝线固定在大脑镰上端，轻轻牵拉上矢状窦，使其偏离中线。	Figure 9: Two retention sutures are placed into the superior aspect of the falx to facilitate gentle dural sinus retraction and mobilization away from the midline.
该法可直接扩大半球间的缝隙。	This maneuver is pertinent in expanding the interhemispheric corridor.
将一片Telfa放置在正常大脑半球表面，起到保护作用。	Note the piece of Telfa covering and protecting the normal hemisphere.
图10：T形切开大脑镰，以暴露对侧大脑半球内侧面（楔前叶）。	Figure 10: The “T” incision within the falx cerebri exposes the contralateral medial hemisphere (precuneus).
腰大池引流释放脑脊液，对于健侧半球移位，减小脑组织牵拉损伤至关重要。	Lumbar CSF drainage is crucial for mobilizing the unaffected hemisphere and minimizing its retraction injury.
切口的下极要延伸到胼胝体水平， 需电凝并横断下矢状窦。	The lower limb of the incision is extended to the level of the corpus callosum and the inferior sagittal sinus is coagulated and transected.
在导航下，定位和保护直窦以及其它相关的深部引流静脉。	The straight sinus and other relevant deep draining veins are localized and protected using neuronavigation.
当大脑镰内的垂直切口接近直窦时，沿着从后向前的方向，以斜行方式完成。	If the vertical incision within the falx approaches the straight sinus, this vertical incision is completed in an oblique fashion from the posterior to anterior direction.
采用这个方法，翻开大脑镰时，楔前叶位于后方的区域才能得以暴露。	Using this methodology, as the falcine flaps are reflected, the more posterior regions of the precuneus are generously exposed.
图11：用缝线牵开大脑镰的硬膜瓣（小图），向对侧大脑半球方向牵开，以增加到达同侧房部的工作角度（上图）。	Figure 11: Additional sutures are placed on the falcine dural flaps (inset image) to mobilize the contralateral (to the lesion) hemisphere and increase the transfalcine working angle toward the ipsilateral atrium (upper image).
相应的术中图片如下图所示，可暴露左侧楔前叶（吸引器尖端）。	Corresponding intraoperative image for exposing the left precuneus (at the tip of suction apparatus) is included (lower image).
棉片保护健侧脑组织，以避免牵拉损伤。	Cottonoid patties protect the contralateral unaffected hemisphere against the gentle retraction vector of the sutures.
未使用固定牵开器。	Fixed retractors are not used.
图12：图示为切除左侧巨大房部脑膜瘤后，楔前叶皮质切开的范围。	Figure 12: The extent of the transprecuneus corticotomy after resection of a large left intra-atrial meningioma is shown.
一条牵开大脑镰硬膜瓣的缝线已经去除，以便更加清楚的展示手术通道。	One of the falcine retention sutures (the anterior one) was removed to allow a more clear depiction of the operative corridor.
一旦彻底止血，可在脑室内放置引流管，以充分引流脑组织碎片，降低术后脑积水的发生风险。	Once hemostasis is achieved, a ventricular catheter in implanted to drain debris within the ventricle and decrease the risk of hydrocephalus.
大脑镰硬膜瓣复位，缝合凸面硬脑膜。	The falcine dural flaps are returned to their original position and the convexity dura is closed.
患者需在重症监护室内观察1-2天，再返回普通病房。	Patients are observed in the intensive care unit for one or two days before they are transferred to the ward.
避免高血压和麻醉类药物的过度使用。	Hypertension and overmedication with narcotics must be avoided.
术后第2天拔除脑室引流管。	The ventriculostomy catheter is usually removed on the 2nd postoperative day.
给予抗癫痫药物。	Anticonvulsant medications are administered.
· 术中取公园躺椅位，利用重力牵拉正常的大脑半球，以减少牵拉损伤。	Placement of the patient in the park-bench position during surgery allows gravity retraction to minimize injury to the normal hemisphere.
· 鉴于手术通道深窄，PITTA在技术上存在挑战性，因此需谨慎选择应用对象。	The PITTA is technically challenging because of its depth and narrow operative corridor and should be used selectively and judiciously.
· 对于难以到达的深部肿瘤，该入路强调手术操作角度的重要性，更胜于手术空间。	This approach emphasizes the importance of the operative working angles over the operative space for accessing difficult-to-reach tumors.
通过直接暴露脉络丛组织的供血动脉，可以在早期离断侧脑室房部脑膜瘤的血液供应。	Meningiomas of the region can be devascularized early in their dissection due to a direct exposure of their feeders from the choroid plexus.
· 纵裂经大脑镰入路，有助于充分暴露房部内侧的AVM，在尽量小的脑组织移位下，早期对脉络膜和大脑后动脉的供血分支进行近端阻断。	The interhemispheric transfalcine approach facilitates an adequate exposure of the medial atrial AVM’s and proximal control over the choroidal and posterior cerebral artery feeders early on with minimal normal brain transgression.
颅咽管瘤	Craniopharyngioma
图1：图示为Harvey Cushing的一个病人，在1911年11月12日行鞍上颅咽管瘤术后继发脑膜炎，最终导致患者死亡。	Figure 1: Photos of a patient of Harvey Cushing who died from meningitis after surgery for a suprasellar craniopharyngioma on November 12, 1911.
这张图片被Cushing用于讲课的幻灯片中。	This image is the lantern slide that Cushing used in his lectures.
Cushing的手术记录中写道：典型的脚间窝囊肿，来源自咽部。	The operative note by Cushing noted: “Typical interpeduncular cyst of pharyngeal origin.
鞍区减压。	Sellar decompression.
这个手术的术前计划非常糟糕。	A badly planned operation.
患者最终在第12天时死于脑膜炎。	Death from meningitis on twelfth day.
右图为尸检的脑组织样本，显示经蝶入路后肿瘤减压的范围。	” The autopsy brain specimens on the right demonstrate the extent of tumor decompression through the transsphenoidal route.
颅咽管瘤一般起源于垂体柄上的化生腺垂体细胞巢。	Craniopharyngiomas typically arise from nests of metaplastic adenohypophyseal cells of the pituitary stalk.
除去5%完全位于脑室内，大部分病灶的实质结节起源于鞍上区，其囊性部分突入三脑室。	Except for the 5% that are purely intraventricular, most of these lesions originate from the parasellar space with their nodule and extend their cystic section into the third ventricle.
这些肿瘤粘连和包裹部分或所有以下结构：视神经和视交叉，垂体和垂体柄，Willis动脉环，脑干，下丘脑，三脑室，以及额/颞叶。	These tumors adhere to and encase some or all of the following structures: the optic nerves and chiasm, pituitary gland and stalk, circle of Willis, brainstem, hypothalamus, third ventricle, and the frontal/temporal lobes.
一个相对安全的手术入路是从下方穿过视交叉下通路。	A relatively safe corridor of approach is available from below through the subchiasmatic route.
这些肿瘤和主体位于三脑室的类型，常位于视交叉后方，因此适合选择内镜下经鼻入路，传统的经颅入路很难达到视交叉后区。	These tumors and their predominantly third ventricular counterparts are most often retrochiasmatic in location; this feature makes them suitable candidates for endoscopic transnasal surgery as there is no practical transcranial route to access the retrochiasmatic space.
近年来，笔者几乎已经摒弃经颅入路切除颅咽管瘤，而更偏好经鼻入路。	I have nearly abandoned the transcranial route for resection of craniopharyngiomas in favor of the transnasal route for the past few years.
无论是手术切除的程度，患者的恢复，还是术后并发症的发生，都更加支持直接的微侵袭经鼻入路。	I believe the results of the extent of resection, patient recovery, and postoperative morbidity are in favor of the direct minimally invasive transnasal corridor.
后面我们将对经颅和经鼻手术切除颅咽管瘤的适应症进行对比。	The indications for the transnasal versus transcranial approaches for this tumor type are discussed below.
虽然大部分肿瘤位于漏斗附近或以此中心，颅咽管瘤的临床表现还是取决于肿瘤实际所处的位置与周围结构的关系，包括垂体和垂体柄，视器，三脑室和三脑室底面（下丘脑）。	Although generally centered on or near the infundibulum, the clinical presentation of a craniopharyngioma depends on the tumor’s exact location relative to structures surrounding it: the pituitary gland and stalk, optic apparatus, and the third ventricle and its floor (the hypothalamus).
视觉障碍和头痛是成人最常见的神经系统首发表现。	In adults, visual disturbances and headaches are the most common presenting neurologic findings.
由于侵犯下丘脑所导致的神经认知改变也很常见，而内分泌系统的功能障碍存在多变性，往往在临床上表现隐匿。	Neurocognitive changes due to infiltration of the hypothalamus are also common, although endocrine dysfunction is variable and frequently not clinically significant.
在儿童患者中，颅高压更为常见，内分泌障碍则多与生长激素不足有关，还往往伴有隐性的视觉障碍。	In children, elevated intracranial pressure is more common, while endocrine dysfunction is usually related to growth hormone insufficiency; occult visual findings are also often present in children.
在两类患者群中，脑积水均占了1/3。	Hydrocephalus occurs in one-third of both populations.
MRI是评估颅咽管瘤最主要的手段。	The primary modality to evaluate a craniopharyngioma is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
该影像学检查可显示出肿瘤的特征，多为分叶状的混杂信号影，伴有大的囊肿形成。	This imaging modality allows characterization of the tumor, which is generally lobulated with heterogeneous signal intensity and large cysts.
CT用于评估颅底的解剖结构，以评价手术入路的可行性。	Computed tomography (CT) is necessary to evaluate the anatomy of the underlying skull base to assess its feasibility as an operative corridor.
此外，造釉细胞型常含有钙化区，而乳头型仅见于成人患者，则缺乏钙化区。	Additionally, the adamantinomatous subtype usually contains areas of calcification, whereas the papillary subtype, seen exclusively in adults, lacks calcification.
考虑到这类肿瘤术前多存在内分泌功能障碍，所有患者应进行完整的内分泌功能评价。	Given the high incidence of preoperative endocrine dysfunction with these tumors, all patients should undergo a complete endocrinologic evaluation.
这些检查还有助于指导术后激素缺乏的处理。	These tests will also facilitate management of postoperative hormone deficiency.
在围手术期，皮质醇缺乏和尿崩是两大重要的潜在诊断，需要进行合适的治疗。	In the perioperative setting, adrenal insufficiency and diabetes insipidus are the two potential diagnoses of primary importance and demand appropriate treatment.
术前需要进行正规的视野评估和散瞳后眼底镜检查，均记录了术前的基线状态，并为今后监测肿瘤的复发提供参考点。	Preoperative formal visual field and a dilated fundoscopic examination are required, both to document a preoperative baseline status and to provide a reference point when monitoring for future tumor recurrence.
对术前视野缺损的充分理解，有助于设计合理的手术方案。	A complete understanding of any preoperative visual deficit is necessary to fully design the optimal surgical plan.
鞍上病灶还包括一系列病理类型，包括外源性的脑膜瘤、生殖细胞肿瘤、转移瘤和表皮样囊肿，内源性的下丘脑或视束胶质瘤，垂体大腺瘤，以及骨性的大细胞肿瘤和动脉瘤性骨囊肿。	Other suprasellar lesions include a variety of pathologies that can be extrinsic (meningioma, germ cell tumor, metastasis, epidermoid cyst), intrinsic (hypothalamic or optic glioma, pituitary macroadenoma), or bony (giant cell tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst).
血管检查（CT或MR血管造影）可以排除非典型的动脉瘤，界定周围可能受到肿瘤影响的正常血管结构，如肿瘤向前延伸可累及大脑前动脉，向后方可累及基底动脉尖和后交通动脉，向外侧可累及颈内动脉远端及其分支。	Vascular studies (CT or MR angiography) will rule out atypical aneurysms and define the surrounding normal vasculature that may be involved in tumors extending anteriorly (anterior cerebral arteries), posteriorly (basilar apex and posterior communicating arteries), or laterally (distal internal carotid arteries and their branches).
如发现一钙化的囊性肿瘤，且与垂体柄关系密切，则几乎可确诊为颅咽管瘤。	The finding of a calcified cystic mass associated with the pituitary stalk is almost pathognomonic of a craniopharyngioma.
术前影像学检查可评估垂体柄受累的程度，从而评价为达到肿瘤术全切，需要牺牲垂体柄的风险。	Preoperative imaging should assess the degree of pituitary stalk involvement; this variable can potentially define the risk of its sacrifice to achieve a gross total resection.
图2：图示为两例不同大小和形态的颅咽管瘤。	Figure 2: The images for two patients with craniopharyngiomas of different size and morphology are demonstrated.
上排影像所示为一例实性成分为主的大颅咽管瘤，可以通过额下经终板入路进行暴露。	The images in the upper row demonstrate a large predominately solid craniopharyngioma that can be exposed via a subfrontal route through the lamina terminalis.
相反，中排和下排影像所示为典型的囊实性肿瘤，适合采用经鼻入路。	On the other hand, the images in the middle and lower rows show typical, partially cystic and solid tumor suitable for the transnasal route.
注意右下方CT所示的结节样钙化影。	Note the nodular calcification found on CT in the right lower image.
两例肿瘤中垂体柄均严重受累，因此在切除过程中想要保护垂体柄几乎是不可能的。	The significant involvement of both tumors with the pituitary stalk renders salvage of the stalk during resection most likely impossible.
目前缺乏证据支持对这类肿瘤进行观察，因为它们在发现时往往都引起了临床症状。	There is minimal evidence regarding observation for these lesions as they are almost always symptomatic at presentation.
对于年长的成人，如果偶然发现了无症状的病灶，通过一系列影像学、内分泌学和眼科检查进行随访监测可能是合适的选择。	In older adults with incidental asymptomatic lesions, serial radiographic, endocrinologic, and ophthalmologic monitoring may be appropriate.
然而，如果诊断为颅咽管瘤的可能性较大，笔者仍然建议手术，如果进一步通过冰冻病理证实了诊断，应进行手术切除和辅助放疗。	However, if the diagnosis of craniopharyngioma is likely, I recommend surgery, and if the diagnosis is confirmed through frozen section, resection and adjuvant radiotherapy are instituted.
手术的目的是为了在保证安全的前提下尽可能多的切除肿瘤。	The goal of surgery is maximal safe resection.
尽管全切肿瘤可能可以达到手术治愈，但是不应该以损伤下丘脑为代价，否则将导致患者生活质量低下。	Although a surgical cure is possible with gross total resection, this should not be achieved at the cost of damaging the hypothalamus, as this leads to poor quality of life.
放疗是最主要的辅助治疗手段，放疗或质子激光治疗在保护周围关键结构中所起的作用越来越大。	Radiotherapy is the main adjuvant treatment, and there is an increasing role for radiosurgery or proton beam therapy to protect the surrounding vital structures.
姑息性的治疗手段如囊肿减压/开窗术或脑室分流术，虽然可以改善症状，但是均无法彻底解决问题，只能暂时稳定病情。	Palliative procedures such as cyst decompression/fenestration or ventricular shunting may improve symptoms, but they generally only temporize the situation without definitively addressing the problem.
在一些少见的复发且无法手术的病例中，可以选择其他手段如瘤腔内短距离放射疗法。	Other methods of therapy such as intracavitary brachytherapy may be chosen in rare recurrent nonoperative cases.
术前评估内容包括神经-眼科检查，尤其要注意视野和内分泌水平的评估。	Preoperative evaluation includes neuro-ophthalmologic tests with special attention to visual fields and endocrinologic testing.
神经精神评估对于引起占位效应的病灶，尤其影响到额叶或内侧颞叶者，往往能起到帮助作用。	Neuropsychological evaluation is often helpful for lesions causing mass effect, especially those affecting the frontal or medial temporal lobes.
大部分颅咽管瘤（75%）主体位于鞍上区，该区域的病理性扩大为手术提供了主要的通路。	The majority of craniopharyngiomas (75%) have a significant suprasellar component, and the pathologic expansion of the suprasellar space defines the main operative corridor.
此外，鼻旁窦的范围和大小，周围血管结构的受累情况，以及肿瘤向两侧颈动脉或向后颅窝延伸的程度，共同决定了经颅或经鼻入路的选择。	Moreover, the extent and size of the paranasal sinuses, the involvement of surrounding vascular structures, and the expansion of the tumor lateral to the carotid arteries or into the posterior fossa determine the transcranial versus transnasal choice of approach.
特殊情况下，为保护完整的三脑室底，对于少见的完全位于脑室内的肿瘤类型，可能不适合采用经鼻入路。	Specifically, rare tumor types that are purely intraventricular may not be ideal for an endonasal approach because the intact third ventricle floor has to be preserved.
实性成分占大部分，或延伸至颈动脉分叉部以外的肿瘤，适合选择经颅入路（图2）。	Tumors that are largely solid or have a large extension lateral to the carotid bifurcation are suitable for a transcranial corridor (Figure 2).
完全位于鞍内的病灶，尽管少见，可能仅需要最小程度的鞍旁骨质暴露即可。	Purely intrasellar lesions, although rare, may require minimal parasellar bony exposure.
基于下丘脑受累的程度，应针对性的设计全切或部分切除的术前计划。	Based on involvement of the hypothalamus, a preoperative plan for a gross total versus subtotal resection should be designed.
冠状位的FLAIR序列最适合评估肿瘤侵犯下丘脑的情况。	Hypothalamic involvement by the tumor usually is best seen on coronal fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences.
内镜经鼻显微手术切除颅咽管瘤	ENDOSCOPIC TRANSNASAL MICROSURGICAL RESECTION OF CRANIOPHARYNGIOMAS
在“扩大内镜经鼻入路”一章中讨论了颅底鞍旁开颅/骨质磨除技巧。	The technical nuances for skull base parasellar craniotomy/osteotomy are discussed in the Endoscopic Expanded Transnasal Approach chapter.
请参照该章节，了解手术起始和结束的相关步骤，包括如何暴露和关颅。	Please refer to this chapter for information regarding the initial and final stages of the operation, including exposure and closure.
经颅入路切除肿瘤的要点，则在“颅咽管瘤（经颅）”一章中进行讨论。	The open transcranial approaches for resection of this tumor type are discussed in the Craniopharyngioma (Transcranial) chapter.
图4：大多数颅咽管瘤的鞍上部分占据了很大的体积，其囊性扩张部分推移或进入三脑室。	Figure 4: The majority of craniopharyngiomas have a large suprasellar component with cystic expansion displacing or entering the third ventricle.
一般鞍区内容物向后方移位，导致鞍上池的扩大。	The sellar contents are generally displaced posteriorly, causing enlargement of the suprasellar cisterns.
图示为一例位于视交叉后方的颅咽管瘤的典型病理解剖情况。	Shown here is the typical pathoanatomy of a retrochiasmatic craniopharyngioma.
手术入路通过后方平台，主要是鞍结节和蝶窦前壁（蓝色部分）。	The operative approach is through the posterior planum, mainly the tuberculum sellae and anterior wall of the sella (demarcated in blue).
经鼻入路可以提供沿着肿瘤长轴的手术工作角度。	Note the enhanced operative working angles along the long axis of the tumor afforded by the transnasal route.
无需移除整个鞍底，否则会增加垂体受损的风险，并增加手术切除肿瘤后颅底重建的难度和术后脑脊液鼻漏的风险。	Removal of the entire sellar floor is unnecessary; such bone removal would place the pituitary gland at risk and complicate skull base reconstruction at the end of resection while increasing the risk of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
图5：常规制作鼻粘膜瓣。	Figure 5: A nasoseptal flap is routinely raised.
蝶窦切开范围应包括筛窦后部切开以暴露后方的蝶骨平台，鞍上结节和完整的蝶鞍前壁。	Sphenoidotomy should include a posterior ethmoidectomy to visualize the posterior planum sphenoidale, the suprasellar notch, and the full anterior wall of the sella.
剥除黏膜时应暴露两侧的视神经颈内动脉隐窝。	Mucosal removal should extend to the level of the lateral opticocarotid recesses.
用圆形钻头的高速磨钻磨除鞍上结节，并根据肿瘤的大小沿着蝶鞍前壁向下方暴露至肿瘤下缘，向前方沿着平台后部暴露至肿瘤前缘（插图内蓝色部分）。	A high-speed drill with a round bit is used to remove the bone of the suprasellar notch, inferiorly down the anterior wall of the sella based on the extent of the tumor, and anteriorly along the posterior planum until the anterior limit of the tumor is reached (outlined in blue, inset image).
神经导航可以为骨质切除的范围提供更多的参考。	Neuronavigation provides additional guidance for the extent of the osteotomy.
如果需要扩大手术入路，可以切除蝶鞍底，以便在切除肿瘤时将鞍区内容物向后方移位（垂体移位）。	If a more expanded approach is needed, the sellar floor may be removed to allow posterior displacement of the sellar contents (pituitary transposition) during tumor dissection.
向两侧磨除骨质的范围至少达到视神经颈内动脉隐窝内缘。	Lateral bony removal extends at least to the level of the medial opticocarotid recesses.
如果肿瘤向两侧生长超过蝶鞍外侧界，笔者建议磨出部分颈动脉表面的骨质（上图，虚线部分），以避免盲目地在肿瘤包膜的外侧缘进行分离操作。	If the tumor extends laterally beyond the boundaries of the sella, I attempt to remove some of the bone over the carotid arteries (top image, dotted line) to avoid blind dissection around the lateral edges of the tumor capsule.
图6：在完成骨质切除后，用双极电凝对暴露的硬脑膜，包括海绵间窦进行烧灼。	Figure 6: When bony removal is complete, the exposed dura, including the intercavernous sinus, is cauterized with bipolar electrocautery.
笔者会用一支含有止血基质的封闭剂（Baxter，Deerfield，IL）处理来源于海绵窦或所暴露硬膜范围内其他静脉湖的出血。	I use ample amount of Floseal hemostatic matrix (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) to seal the bleeding from the cavernous sinus and other venous lakes within the exposed dura.
十字形切开硬脑膜。	The dura is incised in a cruciate fashion.
考虑到大部分颅咽管瘤是囊性的，早期囊液引流可显著缩小肿瘤的体积，因此骨质磨除和硬脑膜切开的范围可以小于病灶本身。	Since most craniopharyngiomas are cystic, the extent of osteotomy and the dural opening may be smaller than the lesion itself because early cyst drainage dramatically decreases tumor size.
显微手术切除的主要目标的肿瘤的实质结节部分。	It is mainly the nodule that needs to be microsurgically dissected.
向外侧应更多地切除颈动脉表面的骨质，以便于将肿瘤结节从视束上分离下来。	The lateral extent of osteotomy over the carotid arteries is more generous to permit dissection of the tumor nodule from the optic tracts.
在不以牺牲显微手术过程中病灶充分暴露的前提下，尽量缩小骨质去除的范围，对于降低最限制经鼻颅底手术的并发症，即术后脑脊液漏的发生，是至关重要的。	The principle of judicial minimalism in bone removal, while not compromising adequate lesional exposure to conduct microsurgery, is pertinent for minimizing the most limiting complication of endonasal skull base surgery, namely postoperative CSF leakage.
在打开硬脑膜前，应彻底剥除周边骨缘上的黏膜，以便在手术结束时放置鼻中隔黏膜瓣，同时也可以进行硬膜外分离以进行分层关颅。	Prior to dural opening, a circumferential bony edge should be mucosa-free to allow placement of the mucosal nasoseptal flap at the end of the operation, and epidural dissection for a layered closure may also be performed.
可以用超声来指导硬膜切开，避免术者损伤颈动脉。	Ultrasonography may be used to guide the dural opening and help the surgeon avoid injuring the carotid arteries.
在打开硬脑膜后即可看到漏斗前方的肿瘤。	Upon opening the dura, preinfundibular tumors are immediately visible.
在肿瘤的表面往往会有一薄层蛛网膜覆盖，需要锐性打开。	There is often a thin layer of arachnoid covering the tumor that should be opened sharply.
尽可能在手术早期识别垂体柄和垂体上动脉，应尽量长时间地保护这些结构，除非到最后为了达到肿瘤全切而不得不牺牲垂体功能。	It is important to identify the stalk and the superior hypophyseal arteries as early as possible during surgery to facilitate their preservation for as long as possible until it is determined that gross total resection necessitates the sacrifice of the pituitary function.
图7：在打开硬脑膜时，肿瘤包膜可能是唯一可见的结构，很可能因为增厚而变得不透明。	Figure 7: Upon opening the dura, the tumor capsule may be the only visible structure and it may be thickened and opaque.
术者应保持耐心，对肿瘤和其囊肿进行减压，这样才能逐步移动肿块，并暴露周围的神经血管结构，包括视交叉。	The operator should remain patient and decompress the tumor and its associated cyst, because this maneuver will mobilize the mass and allow identification of the surrounding cerebrovascular structures, including the optic chiasm.
图8：在经过初始的减容和囊肿引流后，可以在视交叉下间隙内从包膜前方开始进行薄膜外分离。	Figure 8: After the initial debulking and cyst drainage, extracapsular dissection is initiated anterior to the capsule within the subchiasmatic space.
锐性分离可以避免精细血管结构的撕裂，同时保护垂体上动脉供应视交叉、垂体柄和视神经后部的分支血管。	Sharp dissection avoids avulsion of the fine vasculature, and protects the branches of the superior hypophyseal arteries supplying the chiasm, pituitary stalk, and posterior optic nerves.
图9：一旦确定视交叉的位置，肿瘤前界不再粘连在视交叉上，可以安全地对包膜进行更多的操作，更大程度地打开包膜（插图）。	Figure 9: Once the anterior tumor is no longer tethered to the chiasm whose location is reliably identified, the capsule may be safely manipulated further and opened more widely (inset image).
此时可以安全地进行更大程度的内减压操作。用环形刮匙刮除实性或钙化的内容物。	More aggressive internal debulking is now safe and possible; ring curettes are used to remove the solid or calcified portions.
囊液的吸除更进一步缩小肿瘤体积。	Further cyst aspiration deflates the tumor.
图10：用成角剥离子和30度内镜，进入视神经颈内动脉池，对肿瘤外侧包膜进行分离。	Figure 10: The lateral tumor capsule is now dissected by entering the opticocarotid cistern using angled dissectors and a 30-degree endoscope.
轻柔地将肿瘤包膜牵向内侧，牵拉并锐性切断蛛网膜粘连。	By gently medializing the tumor capsule, I stretch and sharply cut the arachnoid adhesions and membranes.
术者沿着上方的颈内动脉内侧边缘追踪，注意识别并保护垂体上动脉。	The operator traces the medial border of the internal carotid artery superiorly, while taking care to identify and preserve the superior hypophyseal arteries;
烧灼并离断肿瘤的供血动脉，注意保护过路血管。	tumor-feeding arteries are coagulated and cut and en passage vessels are strictly protected.
对侧也进行重复的操作，以充分游离两侧肿瘤边缘。	This is repeated contralaterally to free both lateral tumor margins.
未充分辨认缠绕在蛛网膜和肿瘤包膜中的视交叉下穿支动脉，并最终导致这些血管的牺牲，是导致术视力衰退最常见的原因。	One of the most common reasons for visual deterioration after surgery is indiscriminate sacrifice of the subchiasmatic perforating arteries entangled in the arachnoid membranes and tumor capsule.
图11：继续一步一步沿着上方和外侧的蛛网膜平面，对肿瘤包膜进行锐性分离，以充分游离剩余的视交叉结构。	Figure 11: Sharp tumor capsule dissection continues along the superior and lateral arachnoid planes in a stepwise fashion to fully release the rest of the chiasm.
这类肿瘤往往向视交叉后方扩展并突入下丘脑，导致三脑室底的缺损。	These tumors frequently infiltrate and expand posteriorly behind the optic chiasm into the hypothalamus, resulting in a defect at the floor of the third ventricle.
肿瘤往往穿过该缺损部位突入三脑室内。	Through this defect, the tumor grows its intraventricular component.
在解剖后方平面时，应仅仅将与肿瘤密切相关的那部分下丘脑分离出来。	The posterior dissection plane should disconnect only the portion of the hypothalamus that is clearly dominated by the tumor;
三脑室底部任何看似正常的组织都应予以保护。	any partly normal-appearing tissue along the floor of the ventricle should be spared.
肿瘤与下丘脑的边界可能不会非常明显。	The tumor-hypothalamus border may not be clearly apparent.
图12：一旦将视器游离出来，肿瘤囊性部分包膜就可以从三脑室壁上剥离下来。	Figure 12: Once the optic apparatus is free, the capsule of the cystic portion of the tumor is dissected from the walls of the third ventricle.
轻柔地牵拉肿瘤以识别解剖平面，应避免用力拖拽肿瘤包膜，否则可能会造成下丘脑损伤。	Although gentle traction may be necessary to identify the planes, forceful impatient pull on the tumor capsule can cause hypothalamic injury and should be avoided.
45度内镜可以探查三脑室和下丘脑（内部插图）。	An 45-degree angled endoscope allows inspection of the third ventricle and hypothalamus (inset image).
为避免脑室或下丘脑等关键结构的损伤，可残留部分肿瘤组织于脑室壁表面。	Tumor fragments may be left adherent to the walls of the ventricle or hypothalamus to avoid injury to these vital structures.
继续剥离位于后方的残余肿瘤包膜。	The rest of the capsule may now be dissected posteriorly.
图13：接着，将肿瘤下方的包膜与受压的鞍内容物锐性分离开来。	Figure 13: Next, the inferior tumor capsule is sharply dissected from the compressed sellar contents.
如果肿瘤存在鞍内成分，则需要切开鞍隔。	If an intrasellar component is present, the diaphragma sella must be incised.
检查垂体柄看是否受累，为降低术后激素水平低下的发生率，应尽可能予以保留（插图：上图中垂体柄无法保留，而下图中可见肿瘤与垂体柄之间存在解剖平面）。	The pituitary stalk is inspected for disease involvement and preserved, if possible, to minimize postoperative hormonal morbidity (inset images: upper configuration precludes preservation of the stalk and the lower inset image illustrates a reasonable plane between the tumor and stalk).
根据术者的经验判断，为达到手术全切可以考虑牺牲垂体柄，尤其是患者术前就存在垂体功能低下的情况。	Based on the surgeon’s judgment, the stalk may be sacrificed to achieve gross total resection, especially if the patient is suffering from pituitary dysfunction before surgery.
图14：在处理好垂体柄后，肿瘤可能在后方与乳头体或基底动脉及其分支之间存在粘连。	Figure 14: Following management of the pituitary stalk, the tumor is often still tethered posteriorly to the mammillary bodies or basilar artery and its branches.
此时重要的是避免对肿瘤的过度牵拉。	It is important to resist the temptation to pull on the tumor at this stage.
应该耐心地将肿瘤从乳头体、视束、Liliequist膜、大脑后动脉、后交通动脉和豆纹动脉上锐性分离出来。	The tumor should be sharply and patiently dissected from the mammillary bodies, optic tracts, membrane of Liliequist, posterior cerebral arteries, posterior communicating arteries, and the thalamoperforators.
带角度的内镜可以帮助直视下进行显微手术。	An angled endoscope allows microsurgery under direct visualization.
图15：使用双手显微操作技术，可以用成角显微剪刀将肿瘤从垂体柄上锐性分离下来。	Figure 15: Using bimanual microsurgical techniques, the tumor is sharply dissected from the pituitary stalk using angled microscissors.
这样往往可以彻底游离和挪动包膜。	This disconnection often releases the capsule and allows its delivery.
图16：肿瘤包膜已经被充分游离并完整切除。	Figure 16: The tumor capsule is now circumferentially free and is removed.
用0度和成角内镜探查瘤腔和三脑室，以排查出血和残余肿瘤组织。	The tumor cavity and third ventricle are inspected with straight and angled endoscopes for bleeding and residual tumor.
注意观察三脑室内，基底动脉分叉处和大脑后动脉（顶图的插图和下方图片）。	Note the view into the third ventricle, around the basilar bifurcation and posterior cerebral arteries (top inset and lower images).
如果脑室内还有残留肿瘤，需要重新评估，是否可以安全地予以切除。	If residual intraventricular tumor is present, it may now be re-evaluated for further safe resection.
用温盐水反复冲洗，以防止残留的囊内容物继发的化学性脑膜炎，同时还可以起到止血的作用。	Copious irrigation with warm normal saline is used to avoid chemical meningitis from residual cyst contents and to achieve hemostasis.
病例分享	Case Example
该患者因视力减退前来就诊，发现鞍上一中等体积的颅咽管瘤。	This patient presented with visual decline and was diagnosed with a suprasellar craniopharyngioma of moderate size.
图17：MRI显示了一个中等大小、实性成分为主的颅咽管瘤。	Figure 17: MR imaging demonstrates the moderate size, mostly solid craniopharyngioma.
采用经蝶经鞍结节入路，磨除有限的骨质即足以切除肿瘤。打开硬脑膜仅能看到肿瘤包膜（第二行，左图）。	Note the limited transsellar-transtuberculum osteotomy necessary for resection of this tumor; Only the tumor capsule was apparent upon dural opening (second row, left image).
在肿瘤减容后，即可将肿瘤包膜从垂体柄上分离出来（第二行，右图）。	Upon decompression of the tumor mass, the pituitary stalk was readily dissected from the the tumor capsule (second row, right image).
继续将肿瘤包膜从ICA、垂体上动脉（第三行，红色箭头）以及视交叉下表面（第四行）处游离下来。	The tumor capsule was also dissected from the ICA and superior hypophyseal artery (red arrow)(third row) as well as the undersurface of the chiasm (fourth row).
在切除肿瘤后，即可看到对侧视辐射。确认垂体柄的完整性（最后一行）。	The contralateral optic radiation was also released and the tumor removed; the integrity of the pituitary stalk was confirmed (last row).
关颅时需小心谨慎，以避免术后脑脊液瘘，影响原本完美的手术结果。	Meticulous closure is necessary to avoid postoperative CSF leakage that can spoil a good resection result.
图18：在切除肿瘤后，可采用垫圈技术进行颅底重建，首先放置比缺损面积更大的硬脑膜替代材料，或者移植筋膜，然后垫入硬质材料。	Figure 18: Once tumor resection is complete, a gasket closure technique is conducted by first placing an oversized dural substitute or facial graft, followed by a countersunk rigid implant.
根据骨窗的外侧界，在移植物上做几个缺口，以避免接触和压迫到视神经。	Depending on the lateral extent of the bony opening, notches are cut into the implant to avoid contact with and compression on the optic nerves.
或者，用自体或异体硬脑膜重建材料进行多层重建。	Alternatively, a layered closure using harvested or allograft dural reconstruction materials may be conducted.
然后做Valsalva动作，可以帮助术者发现明显的脑脊液瘘口。	Valsalva maneuvers are used to allow the surgeon to detect any obvious CSF fistulas.
在手术开始制作的鼻中隔带蒂黏膜瓣，此时可以盖在骨窗上，并用纤维蛋白胶进行固定。	The nasoseptal pedicled mucosal flap that was harvested at the beginning of surgery is then placed over the seal and covered with fibrin glue.
关颅的细节，可以参考“内镜下扩大经鼻入路”章节。	See the Endoscopic Expanded Transnasal Approach chapter for more details on closure.
术后思考	Postoperative Considerations
病人在监护室单元观察一晚，接受频繁的神经功能评估和疼痛、血压控制。	The patient is observed in the intensive care unit overnight for frequent neurologic evaluations and pain and blood pressure control.
脑室系统开放会导致术后脑脊液漏的发生率增高。	Entry into the ventricular system carries a higher risk of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak.
因此，在术后进行3-4天的腰大池引流，然后病人可以起床活动。	Therefore, lumbar drainage is used for 3-4 days after surgery; the patient is then mobilized.
启动腰大池引流的最佳时机还存在争议。	The best timing for the initiation of lumbar drainage is controversial.
一些术者会在术后延迟4-6个小时开始引流，另外一些术者则建议立即引流。	Some operators delay drainage for 4-6 hours after surgery while others start drainage immediately.
笔者则会等待术后第一天的CT平扫结果，在排除了明显的气颅之后开始引流，否则气颅的症状会加重。	I wait for the CT scan on the first postoperative day to exclude significant pneumocephalus that can worsen with CSF drainage.
术后继续应激剂量的激素，直到详细评估内分泌功能之后。	Stress dose steroids are continued postoperatively until endocrinologic status can be assessed in detail.
术后进行MRI检查，评估手术切除的程度，并决定是否需要进行后续的放射治疗。	A postoperative MRI is obtained to assess the extent of resection and plan for delayed radiotherapy.
笔者不会进行预防性抗癫痫治疗，除非术中出现皮质损伤。	I do not use prophylactic anticonvulsants unless cortical disruption was noted intraoperatively.
建议进行一系列标准预防措施，包括避免擤鼻涕，用吸管饮水，避免不必要的屏气。	Standard precautions to the patient are recommended; including avoidance of nose-blowing, using a straw to drink, and unnecessary bearing down.
经鼻蝶手术后，尿崩是最常见的术后并发症之一，术前即可存在，术后可能会加重。	Diabetes insipidus (DI) is one of the more frequent postoperative complications after transsphenoidal surgery, which can exists preoperatively and worsens postoperatively.
尿崩的发生与神经垂体或垂体柄的扩张或损伤有关。	The etiology of DI relates to distention or injury of the neurohypophysis or pituitary stalk.
术后短期内，血压可能会迅速升高至危险的水平（145mEq/L），因此仔细监测液体出入量，尿渗透压，以及频繁的血钠评估是非常重要的。	Careful monitoring of fluid input/output, urinary osmolality and frequent serum sodium evaluations are imperative during the immediate postoperative period as serum sodium may rapidly escalate to dangerous levels (145mEq/L).
术中频繁的液体补充，可导致术后早期常规多尿，需要与尿崩进行鉴别。	Routine early postoperative diuresis related to frequent intraoperative fluid boluses must be distinguished from DI.
这可以通过禁水试验来鉴别：早期术后多尿不会影响血浆的渗透压或血钠。	This can be achieved with a water deprivation test: early postoperative diuresis will not impact plasma osmolality or sodium.
禁水试验需要禁水6-8小时，然后测定尿渗透压，在尿崩的情况下，由于患者无法浓缩尿液，因此尿渗透压不会超过200mOsm/kg。	The water deprivation test involves withholding water intake for 6-8 hours and checking urine osmolality, which in the setting of DI fails to exceed 200mOsm/kg due to the patient’s inability to concentrate his or her urine.
这反过来会导致血浆渗透压的升高，可接近320-330mOsm/kg。	This will correspond to a rise in plasma osmolality, such that it can near 320 to 330 mOsm/kg.
尿崩的治疗依赖于患者的功能状况。	Treatment for DI depends on the patient’s functional status;
对于渴觉机制完好的清醒患者，可以保持血浆渗透压。	a conscious patient with intact natural thirst mechanism can maintain plasma osmolality.
而严重尿崩或意识不清的患者，可以用去氨加压素（DDAVP）治疗。	The patients with severe DI or those who are unconscious can be managed with desmopressin (DDAVP).
大约60%的患者术后会出现一过性尿崩，而少于10%的患者会出现永久性尿崩。	Approximately 60% of patients can experience transient DI postoperatively, with less than 10% continuing on to permanent DI.
垂体前叶激素水平的功能失调也很常见。	Dysregulation of the anterior pituitary hormones is also common.
食欲旺盛是颅咽管瘤切除术后一个已被清楚描述的并发症，可导致病理性肥胖，由下丘脑损伤所导致，多发生在儿童患者中。	Hyperphagia leading to morbid obesity is a well-described complication following craniopharyngioma resection that is caused by hypothalamic injury, especially in children.
· 早期瘤体中心减压可以为肿瘤的包膜外分离提供空间，尤其是一些囊性成分的减压。	Early central decompression creates room for subsequent extracapsular tumor dissection, especially of cystic components.
· 对蛛网膜平面进行锐性和轻柔的分离是非常重要的，可以避免供应视交叉的垂体上动脉分支的损伤。	Sharp and gentle dissection of the arachnoid planes is critical to avoid injuring the fine superior hypophyseal branches that supply the optic chiasm.
· 成角内镜可以进一步观察和切除直视下难以到达的角落里的残余肿瘤。	Angled endoscopes allow thorough inspection and further resection of residual tumors in the difficult-to-reach locations under direct vision.
· 脑室底的一小部分可能受到肿瘤侵犯，而成为肿瘤包膜的一部分。	A small part of the floor of the ventricle may be predominantly involved with the tumor and should be considered part of the tumor capsule.
然而，大部分下丘脑和临近的神经结构需要保存下来。	However, most of the hypothalamus and other adjacent neural areas must be preserved.
必要的时候，可以在三脑室壁或底面上残留一小块粘连的肿瘤组织。	If necessary, a small piece of adherent residual capsule may be left behind on the walls or floor of the third ventricle.
侧裂分离技巧	Techniques of Sylvian Fissure Split
图1:大范围解剖侧裂使得动态牵拉下无创动脉瘤夹闭成为可能（左下插图）	Figure 1: Generous dissection of the Sylvian fissure allows atraumatic clip ligation of cerebral aneurysms (inset) using dynamic retraction.
显微手术技术的革新在保护了正常脑组织的同时，为外科医生治疗脑深部病变提供了可能。	The evolution of microsurgical techniques has facilitated preservation of normal brain tissue while providing surgeons with a reasonable access to deep brain lesions.
通过解剖分离脑池和蛛网膜下腔，可以为术者提供安全的手术路径。	The application of these techniques to intra-cisternal and subarachnoidal dissection has created safe surgical corridors.
特别是侧裂的分离，能在对正常脑组织侵袭和牵拉最小的情况下，充分显露Willis环前部、岛叶周围区域、颞叶基底部，以及脚间池周围结构。	Specifically, the dissection of the Sylvian fissure allows exposure of the structures around the anterior circle of Willis, parainsular regions, mesiobasal temporal lobe, and interpeduncular cisterns, with minimal invasion into or retraction of the normal brain parenchyma.
要安全高效的分离侧裂需要熟悉侧裂周围的解剖结构，并且掌握显微手术技术基础。	A safe and efficient “splitting of the Sylvian fissure” requires familiarity with the surgical anatomy of the structures surrounding the fissure and the fundamentals of microsurgical techniques.
大范围解剖侧裂在技术上具有很大的挑战；但这项工作却常常得不到其应有的尊重或关注。	A wide opening of the Sylvian fissure is technically challenging; this task frequently does not receive the respect or attention it deserves.
掌握高效解剖侧裂的技巧对于术者而言是必不可少的，这样术者就不会在手术关键部分之前耗费太多精力，而在真正的关键部分却感到疲劳。	Mastery of efficient fissure dissection is imperative so that the operator does not arrive at the critical part of the operation partially fatigued.
在这个章节，笔者会回顾经侧裂窝达到颈动脉视神经池和岛叶的手术技巧。	In this chapter, I will review the surgical techniques applicable to exploration of the Sylvian fossa to gain access to the carotid-optic cistern and insula.
脑萎缩的老年患者的侧裂解剖会相对简单，而合并动脉瘤性蛛网膜下腔出血的年轻患者的侧裂解剖则相对困难。	There are certainly some “easy fissures” in older patients with brain atrophy, and “difficult fissures” in young patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage.
针对不同的场景，我们需要不同的显微手术技巧和分离策略来达到安全且高效的侧裂解剖。	Each scenario requires a different set of microsurgical skills and maneuvers for safe and efficient fissure dissection
适应症	Indications for the Procedure
侧裂需要分离到什么程度才能足够安全显露前颅底或Willis环前部？关于这个问题仍然存在很多争议。	There is much controversy regarding how much of the fissure should be dissected to safely reach the anterior skull base or anterior circle of Willis.
侧裂广泛解剖的支持者们认为额叶和颞叶的分离会使得手术的空间更加宽阔，对额底的牵拉（沿前颅底和基底池方向）更小。	Proponents of extensive fissure dissection believe that the disconnection of the frontal and temporal lobes will lead to more operative space with less basal frontal lobe retraction along the anterior skull base and basal cisterns.
而一些术者常规的进行侧裂广泛分离，同事另外一些术者则仅做范围较小的侧裂前部分离。	Some operators routinely dissect the fissure generously, whereas others do a minimal anterior fissure split.
笔者认为，侧裂分离的程度取决于潜在病变的部位和质地，脑组织的顺应性（脑萎缩的程度以及是否有脑肿胀），以及术者高效使用动态牵拉，避免固定牵拉的手术技巧。	I believe the extent of required Sylvian fissure dissection depends on the location and texture of the underlying pathology as well as the brain compliance (the extent of brain atrophy and absence of brain swelling,) and the skill of the operator in using dynamic retraction efficiently while avoiding fixed retraction.
一般来说，手术的技术难度大（如处理动脉瘤或者切除纤维化、富血供的肿瘤）和脑组织顺应性差这两个复杂因素决定了需要进行大范围的侧裂分离。	Essentially, the complex interaction between the degree of technical difficulty in managing the aneurysm or removing fibrous vascular tumors and brain resistance to mobilization determines the need for a generous Sylvian fissure split.
有两个极端的情况下需要最大程度的解剖侧裂：大型岛叶肿瘤或者大脑中动脉巨大动脉瘤，在这两种情况下，侧裂应当向两侧广泛分离直至上下岛周沟，再根据肿瘤后极的位置和侧裂粘连分离的安全性来决定侧裂后部解剖范围，尤其是在优势半球（防止损伤颞上回）。	There are two extremes in the need for Sylvian fissure split. For large insular tumors or giant middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysms, the fissure must be dissected as widely as possible to the level of the superior and inferior peri-insular sulci. The posterior extent of dissection is determined by the location of the posterior pole of the tumor and the safety of dissection between very adherent posterior interdigitations of the fissure, especially in the dominant hemisphere.
对于大多数前颅底肿瘤或者前循环动脉瘤手术，笔者通常仅解剖侧裂前部，显露M1段前方的脑池。	For most patients who harbor anterior skull base tumors or anterior circulation aneurysms, I dissect only the anterior limb of the Sylvian fissure, exposing the cistern just anterior to the M1.
如果在处理病变的过程中发现需要增大侧裂的解剖程度，笔者会重新将注意力集中回侧裂，完成更加广泛的分离。	If additional fissure split is deemed necessary during handling of the lesion, I redirect my attention to attempt more extensive split.
总的来说，无创性侧裂解剖对于额下外侧手术角度而言是必要的。	Overall, some degree of atraumatic fissure dissection is mandatory for the lateral subfrontal trajectory.
侧裂池的显微手术解剖	Microsurgical Operative Anatomy of the Sylvian Cistern
侧裂池涵盖了三个部分：侧裂，岛盖（沟）回，侧裂窝，侧裂窝中还包含了位于岛叶浅表的大脑中动脉。	The Sylvian cistern contains three parts: the fissure, the opercular sulci, and the Sylvian fossa. The Sylvian fossa houses the MCA that is just superficial to the insula.
图2：侧裂窝内包含大脑中动脉，位于岛叶外侧间隙（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr教授授权）。	Figure 2: The Sylvian fossa contains the MCA and is the space just lateral to the insula (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
侧裂被分为前部（干）和后部（岛盖部）。	The fissure is divided into anterior (stem) and posterior (insulo-opercular) compartments.
侧裂干起源自前穿质下部，向外侧扩展到颞极。	The stem originates inferiorly at the anterior perforated substance and extends laterally to the temporal pole.
侧裂干向外侧分为上升支、水平支和后支，这些分支的交汇点称之为“侧裂点”。	The stem reaches laterally and divides into the ascending, horizontal, and posterior rami; the confluence of these rami has been referred to as the “Sylvian point. ”
图3：侧裂点用*号标记出。	Figure 3: The Sylvian point is marked with *.
水平支和上升支将额上回分为眶部，三角部以及岛盖部。	The horizontal and ascending rami divide the inferior frontal gyrus into the pars orbitalis, pars triangularis, and pars opercularis.
侧裂内在眶外侧回、额下回、顶下小叶、颞上回的岛盖面，包含数个岛盖间沟。	The Sylvian fissure contains several interopercular sulci between the opercular surfaces of lateral orbital, inferior frontal, inferior parietal, and superior temporal gyri.
这些脑沟由于与邻近的脑回相互推挤，所以常呈弯曲和倾斜的状态。	These sulci are often oblique and curved due to opposition of the adjacent gyri.
脑沟的这种形态结构使得侧裂解剖成为一项极需术者耐心的工作。（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr教授授权）。	This configuration of the sulci makes fissure dissection a demanding task requiring the surgeon’s patience (image courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
位于侧裂点近端的部分我们称之为“近端侧裂”，而相应的位于侧裂点远端的部分我们称之为“远端侧裂”。	The length of the fissure proximal to the Sylvian point is considered the “proximal” fissure and the corresponding length distal to this point is called the “distal fissure. ”
大多数病例中，我们都需要行近端侧裂的分离解剖。	Most cases need a proximal Sylvian fissure dissection.
图4：侧裂的近端部分（侧裂谷）包含了颈内动脉分叉和岛阈，大脑中动脉在此处分为上干和下干。	Figure 4: The proximal section of the fissure (vallecula) houses the internal carotid artery bifurcation and limen insula, where the MCA bifurcates into its superior and inferior trunks.
侧裂谷内还包含外侧豆纹动脉和侧裂深静脉。	The vallecula also contains lateral lenticulostriate perforators and the deep Sylvian vein.
将侧裂谷打开，可以为术者达到大脑中动脉近端和颈内动脉分叉区域提供空间。	Opening of the vallecula will provide space to reach the proximal MCA and internal carotid artery bifurcation territories.
近端部分（蝶骨部-A图）也包括极平面（planum polare）上方的区域，长度约3-4cm。此处的软脑膜界面高度黏连，显微分离时需非常的轻柔。	The proximal (sphenoidal) section (A) also includes the area (3-4 cm) over the planum polare where the pial surfaces can be highly adherent, requiring gentle microdissection.
由于该部分缺乏血管，才使得额颞岛盖得以附着其上。	The paucity of the vessels in this section allows adherence of the frontotemporal opercula.
中间部分（脑岛部-B图）长度达6-7厘米，从岛阈向脑岛后点延伸。	The middle (insular) section (B) is 6 to 7 cm in length and extends from the limen insula to the posterior insular point.
在侧裂的这一部分，脑沟交错的相对较少，可能使得解剖分离得以简化。	In this section of the fissure, the sulci are less interdigitated, possibly simplifying fissure dissection.
侧裂后部（脑岛后部-C图）长度较短（4-5厘米）但是位置较深，由缘上回，颞横回和顶横回覆盖。	The posterior (retroinsular) section (C) is short (4–5 cm) but deep, and covered by the supramarginal, transverse temporal, and transverse parietal gyri.
由于此处岛盖部的结构交错复杂，所以此节段的分离格外具有挑战性。	The dissection can be especially challenging at this segment because of complex interdigitations of the opercula.
在动脉、静脉和整个侧裂的相邻岛盖和岛回的软脑膜表面，有一层致密的软脑膜-蛛网膜纤维小梁网。	There is a dense network of pia-arachnoid fibers around the arteries, veins, and pial surfaces of the adjacent opercula and insular gyri of the entire fissure.
大脑中动脉被分成四个节段：M1段平行于蝶骨嵴向后走行；M2段位于岛阈表面；M3段分布于额颞顶盖，M4段由大脑凸面的数个分支组成。	The MCA is divided in four segments: the M1 segment courses posterior and parallel to the sphenoid ridge, the M2 segment resides on the limen insula, the M3 segment spreads over the frontotemporoparietal opercula, and the M4 segment is composed of the branches to the cerebral convexity.
在近端侧裂内M1段(长3-4厘米)的走行一般是C或S形的。	The course of the M1 segment (3–4 cm in length) within the proximal Sylvian fissure is C- or S-shaped.
大脑中动脉的分支常出现解剖结构上的变异，能熟悉掌握这些结构的解剖变异，对于邻近部位的手术而言十分重要。	There are a number of anatomic variations in MCA branching, and familiarity with these anatomic variations is important for surgery of neighboring lesions.
相关知识请参考《大脑中动脉动脉瘤夹闭技巧》章节中对这些解剖变异的回顾。	Please refer to the chapter on Clip Ligation of MCA Aneurysms for a review of these variations.
从颈内动脉分叉处大脑中动脉的起始段开始探查能够更好的辨识与手术相关的血管解剖，并且在术中能保护好术区的正常解剖结构。	Adequate exploration of the MCA at the point of its origin from the internal carotid artery through its bifurcation will allow appropriate identification of the surgical vascular anatomy and preservation of normal structures during surgery in this region.
分离应该沿着M1的前下方进行，避免术中意外损伤豆纹动脉。	The dissection should be conducted along the inferior and anterior aspect of the M1 to prevent inadvertent injury to the lenticulostriate arteries.
侧裂分离	SYLVIAN FISSURE DISSECTION
病人取仰卧位，头向对侧旋转约30度。	The patient is usually positioned supine on the operating table with his or her head rotated away from the side of the surgery approximately 30 degrees.
如果头部旋转的角度超过30度，可能会使颞叶岛盖部挡住侧裂解剖分离的角度。	Turning the head more than 30 degrees may obstruct fissure dissection by rotating the temporal opercula into the angle of fissure dissection.
在硬脑膜打开之后，轻柔的抬起额叶前部并打开视神经颈动脉池上方的蛛网膜可以十分迅速的达到松弛脑组织的目的。	After the dural opening, further brain relaxation may be immediately achieved by gentle elevation of the anterior frontal lobe and opening the arachnoid membranes over the opticocarotid cisterns.
侧裂分离解剖过程中，在额叶下方塞入小棉球可以保证脑脊液从脑池中持续流出。	A small cotton ball may be inserted underneath the frontal lobe to maintain the outflow of cerebrospinal fluid from these cisterns during fissure dissection.
笔者会用数片Telfa脑棉片覆盖除了岛叶周围区域的大脑表面，避免显微镜的强光对皮层造成损伤。	I cover the surface of the brain, except the peri-insular areas, with pieces of moist Telfa to avoid heat injury to the cortex from the intense light of the microscope.
整个侧裂都覆盖着一层较厚的蛛网膜。	The Sylvian fissure is covered along its entire length with a thick band of arachnoid membrane.
侧裂浅静脉勾画出侧裂的走形。	The superficial Sylvian veins outline the course of the fissure.
如果没有这些静脉，侧裂的辨识将会非常困难；在这些情况下，识别自侧裂中发出至皮层的M4段分支可能会十分有帮助。	In the absence of the veins, identification of the fissure may be difficult; in such cases, recognition of the M4 branches exiting the fissure onto the cortex may be helpful.
侧裂长度一般可达10-14cm，比我们通常所认为的要长。	The fissure is 10 to 14 cm in length, longer than often appreciated.
轻度或者隐匿性皮层发育不良可能会导致侧裂转变成为一系列的大脑沟回，使得术者的分离工作的难度进一步提高。	Minor or subtle forms of cortical malformation can transform the fissure into a series of sulci, making the operator’s job very difficult.
图5：传统的侧裂分离就是指打开侧裂的前1/3（包括侧裂茎干，近端侧裂：颈内动脉分叉和三角部皮层之间）也被称之为前支，暴露M1和M2内侧2cm的部分。	Figure 5: The traditional Sylvian fissure opening involves splitting approximately the anterior one-third of the fissure (namely, Sylvian stem, proximal fissure: between the internal carotid artery bifurcation and pars triangularis) also known as the anterior limb, exposing the M1 and medial 2 cm of the M2 segments.
上图展现了传统的侧裂分离范围和程度。	The extent of this traditional split is demonstrated.
箭头所示为经侧裂入路抵达后交通动脉瘤颈部的情况。	The arrows define the neck of the posterior communicating artery aneurysm approached via the transsylvian route.
自侧裂上静脉上方打开侧裂比从静脉下方操作难度更低，这是由于在80%的情况下，该静脉走行于侧裂下方4mm处。	The Sylvian fissure is more readily split by conducting dissection above rather than below the superior Sylvian vein since the vein travels approximately 4 mm below the fissure in more than 80% of the hemispheres.
笔者更倾向与在静脉的额侧打开蛛网膜，这样在抬起额叶时静脉不会横跨侧裂（阻挡视野）。	The arachnoid of the fissure should preferably be opened on the frontal side of the veins, so that the veins will not cross the fissure when the frontal lobe in elevated.
如果存在多于一条的侧裂浅静脉，笔者更倾向于在两条静脉之间进行操作，因为这些静脉通常会被比软脑膜更加坚固的蛛网膜包裹。	If more than one superficial Sylvian vein is present, I prefer to dissect between the two veins because these veins are encased by arachnoid bands that are typically more robust than the pia.
这些侧裂浅静脉之间通常没有桥接静脉的存在，因此在侧裂分离过程中，连接至侧裂浅静脉的额眶静脉小分支被牺牲掉的可能性不大。	There is often no bridging vein between the superficial Sylvian veins, and therefore the small fronto-orbital tributary veins to the superficial Sylvian vein are less likely to be sacrificed during fissure opening.
分离过程中保留静脉可以保护大脑引流并避免发生静脉性梗塞。	Preservation of the veins during fissure dissection protects cerebral venous drainage and voids venous infarction;
特别当这些侧裂静脉非常粗大，考虑为主要引流静脉，且矢状窦旁静脉在术前血管造影中看起来并不明显时，保护侧裂静脉显得尤为重要。	this is especially important if these veins seem to be dominant based on their large caliber and parasagittal veins are less prominent on preoperative angiography.
三角部皮层尖端沿侧裂点的自然牵拉，为术者提供了最为宽阔的侧裂间隙，在此处，浅表蛛网膜区界限分明；笔者常在此处打开侧裂。	The natural superior retraction of the apex of the pars triangularis along the Sylvian point typically provides the surgeon with the widest transfissure corridor where the superficial arachnoid membrane is demarcated; I resume the Sylvian fissure opening at this specific location.
除此之外，自该点分离侧裂能够暴露一个十分重要的手术定位标志——岛顶(Insular apex)。	Furthermore, exploration of the fissure at this point will expose the insular apex, an important landmark for surgical orientation.
使用圆型蛛网膜刀（beaver刀），笔者沿着侧裂浅静脉在其上方做一个小（3mm）切口，	Using a round blade (beaver knife), I make a small (3-mm) opening along and above the superficial Sylvian vein.
并用此方法沿侧裂在其他几个点切开浅表蛛网膜。	The superficial arachnoid membrane along the fissure may be incised at several points in a similar fashion.
然后，笔者用两把短双极或镊夹夹住蛛网膜边缘，将蛛网膜从静脉上分离的同时离断侧裂表面的纤维。	Next, I extend the opening through the arachnoid by holding the edges of the arachnoid with two short, fine bipolar or jeweler forceps, stripping the arachnoid over the vein and splitting the superficial fibers of the fissure.
如果碰到轻微的软脑膜出血，用一小块明胶海绵同时上覆一块小脑棉来进行压迫止血，如果可能的话，在整个侧裂分离解剖过程中尽量避免使用双极电凝。	If slight pial bleeding is encountered, hemostasis is achieved using a minute piece of gelfoam covered with a small cotton pledget, and bipolar coagulation is avoided during the entire fissure dissection, if possible.
在出血软脑膜附近表面可以继续分离几个毫米（再进行压迫），	Exploration may be conducted a few millimeters further in the neighborhood of the oozing pial surface.
一小段时间后术者再回到该区域检查自然止血的效果。	The surgeon then may return to this region in a short period of time to appreciate the spontaneous hemostasis obtained using this technique.
使用柔软、浸湿的脑棉（1/1mm）或者棉球在相邻脑沟、脑回的软脑膜间移动。	Soft, moist, cotton pledgets (1Ï1 mm) or balls are gently glided between the pial membranes of the adjacent gyri.
使用较细的吸引器一步步轻柔的压迫于脑棉上，利用双极镊逐渐扩大切口深至侧裂窝，使用一块较大的脑棉代替之前的小脑棉置入最初切口。	Gradual and gentle compression over the pledgets by the fine suction tube, in addition to the spread action of the bipolar forceps, will allow gradual extension of the initial opening down to the Sylvian fossa. A slightly larger pledget is introduced into the initial window to replace the smaller pledget as the fissure opening is enlarged and deepened.
较大的脑棉能够使得切口扩大、深入，也能够在分离解剖的过程中，使得该段侧裂保持开放，使术者无需牵开器辅助，继续向前方解剖。	The larger pledget can keep this segment of the fissure open as dissection is continued anteriorly without the need for retractors.
在侧裂打开的最初位置，笔者会将侧裂分离直至能够辨识侧裂窝内大脑中动脉的分支和岛叶，之后再向前继续进行侧裂分离，采用由深部到浅表或“由内到外”的方式。	I split the fissure deep enough to identify the MCA branches and insula in the Sylvian fossa at the site of the initial fissure opening. The dissection then proceeds in the anterograde fashion while opening the fissure from deep toward the surface or “inside-to-outside.”
图6：通过“由内到外“的技术进行侧裂分离。	Figure 6: The Sylvian fissure is split using the inside-to-outside technique.
分离自侧裂点开始，并且逐步向深部进行解剖分离，以便于笔者辨识位于岛叶表面的远端大脑中动脉分支。	The dissection is started at the Sylvian point and extended to the depth of the fissure so that I can identify distal MCA branches on the surface of the insula.
之后，笔者继续自深部向浅表进行侧裂的分离。	I then pursue dissection from deep to superficial (upper image, inset, arrow).
对于这种开放侧裂的方法，Yasargil将其和放射状剥开橙子进行了类比，从外面（左下图）分离出橘子的边缘十分困难，但是如果笔者将手指深入橙子中间，并且放射状分开橙子就十分简单了（右下图）。	This method of opening the fissure has an analogy. Yasargil compared this method to radial splitting of peeled orange wedges. It is difficult to separate the edges from the outside (left lower image), but it is easy to put my finger into the middle of the orange and radially separate the wedges (right lower image).
从外部分离橙子瓣往往更加困难，但如果先进入橙子内部，辨识出分离平面，可以更加轻巧的将橙子瓣分离而不挤压出橙汁。	It is often more difficult to separate orange slices from outside the orange, but if one starts by entering into the center of the orange and identifying the dividing planes of the wedges from inside, one can split the slices more readily without compressing the individual slices and releasing their juice.
由内到外的分离技术使得术者能够早期辨别出大脑中动脉的分支，从而在侧裂深部作为操作方向标志的同时，沿交错复杂的岛盖部调整解剖分离的平面。	The inside-to-outside technique allows early identification of the MCA branches, therefore allowing the surgeon to adjust the plane of dissection along the interdigitating opercula while maintaining the depth of the fissure as a landmark for orientation.
岛盖的轮廓很少成线性垂直走形，主要是因眶外侧回推挤颞上回近端和颞极，导致近端侧裂在冠状面上呈C或S形。	The contours of the interdigitating opercula rarely follow a straight vertical line as the lateral orbital gyrus indents the proximal superior temporal gyrus and temporal pole, causing a C- or S- shaped course of proximal fissure in the coronal plane.
早期辨识出起伏的软脑膜和蛛网膜面在很大程度上简化了侧裂的解剖分离。	Early identification of the undulating pial and arachnoid planes from inside the fissure simplifies dissection tremendously.
当侧裂从内向外开放时，可以用显微剪刀剪开较厚的浅表蛛网膜。	As the fissure is opened toward the surface, the thicker superficial arachnoid membranes may be cut using microscissors.
随着在侧裂点深部识别MCA分支和岛叶，由内向外继续顺行解剖。	Following identification of the MCA branches and insula deep at the Sylvian point, anterograde inside-to-outside dissection continues.
用一个注射器往侧裂窝注入生理盐水可扩大侧裂窝，有利于在软脑膜之间识别蛛网膜平面。	Injection of saline solution using a syringe deep into and along the Sylvian fossa can expand this fossa, facilitating the identification of the arachnoid planes between the pial banks.
在需要的时候，笔者喜欢使用较尖镊子的尖端来夹取并分离较厚的浅表蛛网膜。	I like to use jeweler’s forceps with fine tips to grab and separate the more superficial thick arachnoid bands, when needed.
笔者继续使用直的显微剪刀（非刺刀型）和双极（5mm尖端）进行更深部位的解剖。	I continue deeper dissection using straight (nonbayoneted) microscissors and bipolar forceps (5-mm tips).
通过交替使用双极分离较薄的蛛网膜层，用显微剪刀剪断较厚的蛛网膜，最初打开的侧裂切口得以扩宽、扩大。	Through the alternating use of bipolar forceps to spread the thin arachnoid layers, and microscissors to transect thick ones, the initial fissure opening is enlarged.
借助镊尖的开合动作钝性暴力分离较厚的蛛网膜带或者粘附的软脑膜带将会导致软脑膜损伤和出血。	Forceful blunt dissection or separation of the thick arachnoid bands or adherent pial banks using the spreading action of the forceps will lead to pial injury and bleeding.
而使用双极去进行软脑膜止血可能会导致进一步的皮层损伤和出血。	The use of bipolar coagulation to stop pial bleeding may actually lead to further cortical injury and further bleeding.
侧裂极平面或侧裂前部颞叶平坦的表面和额叶可能黏连十分紧密，	The planum polare or the flatter surface of the anterior fissure on the temporal side may be very adherent to the frontal lobe.
需要术者耐心的进行显微解剖分离。	Patient microsurgical dissection is warranted.
较厚的蛛网膜层在蝶骨翼后方覆盖于侧裂前支表面，在该区域需要使用锐性分离，有时甚至可能需要牺牲掉侧裂上静脉的一条分支。	Thick arachnoid layers cover the most anterior limb of the fissure just behind the sphenoid wing; sharp dissection in this area may require sacrifice of one of the superior Sylvian vein branches.
随着近端侧裂被逐渐打开，大脑中动脉分叉部和M1段分支也得以辨识，沿着该条动脉的内侧进行进一步的解剖分离，能够扩大脑谷，并获得朝向视神经颈动脉池的手术角度。	As the more proximal part of the fissure is split, the MCA bifurcation and the M1 branch is identified and a more medial dissection along this artery will allow expansion of the vallecula and creation of a surgical corridor toward the opticocarotid cisterns.
额岛盖后部常有嵌入侧裂通道的可能；对该部位过度牵拉可能会导致静脉充血和自发性皮层出血，应极力避免。	The posterior frontal operculum often tends to herniate into the transsylvian corridor; its aggressive retraction leads to its venous congestion, and spontaneous cortical bleeding and must be avoided.
沿侧裂的内侧部即将抵达视神经颈动脉池前部时，可见一层较厚的蛛网膜带将额叶和颞叶相互连接，此系带及其偶尔包绕的小静脉应当切断。	Along the medial aspect of the Sylvian fissure and just before reaching the opticocarotid cisterns anteriorly, a thick arachnoid band tethers the frontal and temporal lobes to each other. This band and its occasional encasing small vein are transected.
在视神经颈动脉池的上方做一个T形的蛛网膜切口，该切口的“第一笔”起始于视神经外侧，颈内动脉的上方，向内侧进一步延伸，将直回后部与视交叉分开。	A “T” shaped arachnoid incision is made over the opticocarotid cisterns with the anterior limb of the incision just lateral to the optic nerve and over the carotid artery. This incision is further extended medially to disconnect the posterior gyrus rectus from the chiasm.
T形切口的“第二笔”平行于后交通动脉走行方向，与侧裂内侧打开的蛛网膜相延续。	The posterior limb of the “T” incision can parallel the approximate course of the posterior communicating artery and connects with the arachnoid opening along the medial sylvian fissure.
以下步骤对侧裂解剖分离的原则进行了总结	The following steps summarize the principle maneuvers for Sylvian fissure dissection.
步骤一：侧裂浅部应当自侧裂点进行解剖分离，该点通过蛛网膜带的岛盖部间隙最为突出。	Step 1: The superficial fissure is dissected open at the level of the Sylvian point where the interopercular space through the arachnoid band is most prominent.
进一步扩大解剖至M2分支平面和岛叶，	This dissection is extended to the level of the M2 branches and insula.
注意使用上文讨论中提及的小脑棉。	Note the use of the small cotton pledget discussed above.
步骤二：包裹静脉的浅表厚蛛网膜层可以用尖镊或显微剪刀进行解剖分离。	Step 2: The very superficial thick arachnoid layer encasing the veins may be disrupted using fine forceps or microscissors.
小的脑棉球可用于保持切口的敞开，同时也可用于避免吸引器尖端和软脑膜表面直接接触。	A microcotton ball is used to keep the dissection planes open and avoid direct contact between the suction tip and the pial surfaces.
步骤三：之后，笔者打开侧裂远端的深部，并辨识出大脑中动脉的远端分支作为标记物，进一步在由后到前的方向上，由内到外、由深至浅的进行分离解剖。	Step 3: Next, I use the distal deep opening within the fissure and identify the distal MCA branches as a landmark to further open the fissure from inside-to-outside or deep-to-superficial in the posterior-to-anterior direction.
步骤四：侧裂极平面可能黏连的十分紧密，同时使用圆刀能够快速的辨识切口和软脑膜平面。	Step 4: The planum polare may be very adherent, and a round knife may be used to sharply identify the dissection and pial planes.
请注意由内向外分离技术的路径示意图（插画中绿色箭头所示）	Please note the roadmap for the inside-to-outside technique (inset image, green arrows).
笔者避免去使用常用的“由外向内“的分离技术，该方法应用起来更加的困难，主要是由于额颞盖部的黏连，同时在纵横交错的岛盖部之间缺乏标志区指引解剖分离的缘故。	I avoid the commonly used “outside-to-inside” technique, which is more difficult to perform because of the adherence of the frontotemporal opercula and the lack of any landmarks to guide dissection within the interdigitating opercula.
在沿M1远端内侧部分进行扩展并完成侧裂解剖分离之后，颞叶盖部和岛叶相分离。	After extension and completion of Sylvian fissure dissection more medially along the distal M1 segment, the temporal operculum is mobilized away from the insula.
由于颞叶盖部和岛叶之间存在大脑中动脉分支，使得颞叶盖部较之额叶盖部移动性更好。	The presence of MCA branches between the temporal operculum and the insula facilitates mobilization of the temporal operculum more than the frontal operculum.
如果有必要的话，岛周上下脑沟都可以辨识出。	The superior and inferior peri-insular sulci can be identified, if necessary.
M1分支可以作为分离达到视神经颈动脉池和颈内动脉分叉的标志。	The M1 branch may be used as a landmark to reach the opticocarotid cisterns and the internal carotid artery bifurcation.
侧裂远端分离	Distal Fissure Dissection
由于岛盖后部的黏连，远端侧裂分离常而受到限制；在该区域过于激进的操作可能会增加颞上回的损伤风险；在优势半球更加重要（Wernick区位于优势半球颞上回后部。译者注）。	Distal fissure dissection is often limited because of adherence of the posterior opercula at this level; aggressive manipulation in this area will place the superior temporal gyrus at risk of injury; this can be a factor especially in the dominant hemisphere.
侧裂后部分离仅在大型岛叶肿瘤、M2/3段动脉瘤以及巨大大脑中动脉分叉处动脉瘤的情况下才有必要。	Dissection of the posterior fissures is necessary only for large insular tumors, M2/M3 aneurysms, and giant MCA bifurcation aneurysms.
圆形蛛网膜刀可用于对黏连的软脑膜表面进行分离。	A round arachnoid knife may be used to work within the adherent pial surfaces.
轻柔地动态牵拉额颞叶岛盖部，调整显微镜获得由前向后的操作视角，能良好的显露侧裂后窝、岛叶后部皮质、岛叶周围沟以及M2后段分支。	Gentle dynamic retraction of the frontotemporal opercula and anterior-to-posterior working angles often provide good exposure of the retrosylvian fossa, posterior insular cortex, and the peri-insular sulci, as well as the posterior M2 branches.
· 笔者不会由近端至远端进行侧裂分离。	I do not dissect the fissure from proximal to distal.
这种方式需要显著牵拉额叶，但好处是能够早期显露M1段（获得近端控制）并向其远端进行分离。	This maneuver requires significant frontal lobe retraction as the M1 is identified early and followed toward its distal pathway.
与此相反，由远端至近端的分离方式则不能够早期获得近端控制，尤其是在破裂动脉瘤的手术中，可能会带来风险。	However, distal-to-proximal dissection does not provide early proximal control and poses certain risks, especially in the case of a ruptured aneurysm.
脑室手术的基本原则	Principles of Intraventricular Surgery
图1：Walter Dandy 显示经顶叶皮质入路用手移除一个巨大的脑室肿瘤(Dandy WE. The Brain. Hagerstown, MD: W.F. Prior Company, 1966.)。	Figure 1: Walter Dandy demonstrated manual removal of a large ventricular tumor through the parietal transcortical approach (Dandy WE. The Brain. Hagerstown, MD:  W.F. Prior Company, 1966.)
Dandy开创并引领征服脑室系统的手术技术。	Dandy pioneered techniques for conquering the surgery of the ventricular system.
脑室肿瘤并不常见，约占颅内肿瘤1%以内。	Ventricular tumors are rather uncommon, accounting for less than 1% of intracranial lesions.
因其位置较深难以到达且临近重要的间脑以及脑干，技术上特别有挑战性。	They present a particular technical challenge because of their difficult-to-reach location and the neighboring vital diencephalic and brainstem structures.
所有中枢神经系统肿瘤中约10%为脑室肿瘤，这其中仅有10%完全位于脑室系统。	Intraventricular tumors represent approximately 10% of all central nervous system neoplasms, and only 10% are exclusively contained within the ventricular system.
肿瘤基于中枢神经系统肿瘤分类习惯分为轴内和轴外肿瘤。	The tumor is classified based on its intra-axial and extra-axial components.
最常见的肿瘤包括胶样囊肿、颅咽管瘤、星形细胞瘤、脉络丛乳突状瘤、室管膜瘤、表皮样囊肿和皮样囊肿。	The most common primary brain tumors include colloid cysts, craniopharyngiomas, astrocytomas, choroid plexus papillomas, ependymomas, epidermoid and dermoid cysts.
第二常见的肿瘤包括脑膜瘤、胶质瘤、垂体瘤和蛛网膜囊肿。	The most common secondary tumors include meningiomas, gliomas, pituitary adenomas, and arachnoid cysts.
这些肿瘤通常为良性，生长指数低，并且通常直到生长至较大尺寸，出现梗阻性脑积水或者压迫效应导致临床症状时才被发现。	These tumors are typically benign, grow at a slow rate, and are usually not identified until they reach a large size, at which point the clinical presentation is a result of either obstructive hydrocephalus or gross compression.
供应肿瘤的血管来自脉络膜血管的分支，但是它们直到肿瘤切除的最后阶段才可到达。	Branches of the choroidal vessels that are reached late in resection supply these masses.
这些病变的特点，如体积大、定位深、血运丰富，都增加了手术的复杂性。	These lesions’ characteristics, such as their large size, deep location, and high vascularity, add to the technical complexity of the operation.
脑室壁和周围深部神经核团与必不可少的神经功能密切相关，术中应予以保留。	The indispensable neurologic function associated with the walls of the ventricle and the surrounding deep nuclei should be preserved.
肿瘤的占位效应导致梗阻性脑积水和/或深部脑结构受压迫症状。	The mass effect of the tumor results in either obstructive hydrocephalus or a compressive syndrome of deep brain structures.
很多罹患脑室肿瘤的患者没有临床症状，直到针对不相关的头痛进一步鉴别诊断时才发现脑室肿瘤。	Many patients with these tumors present asymptomatically and the tumors are detected during a diagnostic workup for unrelated headaches.
罹患一个大的脑室内肿块时可能表现出不同的神经功能障碍。	Patients presenting with large intraventricular masses may suffer from varied neurologic deficits.
常见的临床表现包括头痛、平衡紊乱、认知障碍、性情改变、运动乏力、共济失调、视觉障碍，以及当肿瘤生长并扩张进入深部白质时导致癫痫。	Common clinical findings may include headaches, poor balance, cognitive dysfunction, personality changes, motor weakness, ataxia, visual disturbances, and seizures as these masses grow and expand into the deep white matter.
患者可能出现无意识的记忆力障碍，因此术前应该进行神经心理学测试以便术后更详细地评估这些功能障碍。	Patients may be unaware of their memory difficulties and should undergo preoperative neuropsychological testing so that postoperative deficits can be adequately assessed.
梗阻性脑积水可能会急性、慢性或者间断的方式短暂出现。	Obstructive hydrocephalus can manifest temporally as acute, chronic, or intermittent, as has been described with colloid cysts.
急性梗阻性脑积水可表现为突发的头痛、恶心和/或呕吐。	Acute obstructive hydrocephalus may present with acute onset headache, nausea, and/or vomiting.
在极端少见的情况下胶样囊肿引起急性梗阻性脑积水会导致猝死。	Extremely rarely, this mechanism may lead to sudden death with colloid cysts.
间断性脑积水表现为特有的与体位相关的恶心、呕吐、头痛或意识水平的改变。	The intermittent presentation manifests uniquely as posturally-induced nausea, vomiting, headache, or an altered level of consciousness.
脑室周围组织受压后的症状由几个重要的临床综合征组成。	Compression syndromes of the surrounding structures compose the other major facet of the clinical presentation.
中脑受压综合征通常见于脑室内肿瘤，它能导致运动障碍、感觉异常或者Parinaud’s综合征。	Midbrain compression syndromes commonly seen with intraventricular tumors can present with motor dysfunction, sensory disturbance, or Parinaud’s syndrome.
Parinaud’s综合征与松果体区和顶盖处的肿瘤压迫中脑顶盖内的内侧纵束的喙间质核有关。	Parinaud’s syndrome is related to compression of the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus within the midbrain tectum by the tumors of the pineal region and tectal plate.
它包括垂直凝视麻痹（主要是向上凝视）、向上或者向下的眼球震颤和眼球会聚功能受损。	Parinaud’s syndrome includes vertical gaze palsy (primarily upward gaze), upbeat or downbeat nystagmus, and impaired convergence.
很多四脑室肿瘤，包括髓母细胞瘤在内，通常表现为小脑束受压综合征，如共济失调。	Many fourth ventricular tumors, including medulloblastomas, often present with compression syndrome of the cerebellar tracts, such as ataxia.
影像学是脑室肿瘤的主要评估方式，MRI则是影像学的金标准。	Radiography is the primary mode of evaluation for intraventricular tumors, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the gold standard.
MRI提供肿瘤大小、血运、侵犯范围的详细信息。	MRI permits a detailed evaluation of the tumor size, vascularity, and extent of invasion.
它也能评估肿瘤周围的情况，相关的水肿和血管解剖，所有的这些对术前计划都十分重要。	It also permits evaluation of the peritumoral environment, associated edema, and ventricular anatomy, all which are important for preoperative planning.
深入理解深部病变的三维解剖对沿病变长轴选择合适的手术通道来最小化脑牵拉和脑组织破坏十分重要。	An in-depth understanding of the three-dimensional anatomy of deep lesions is important for selection of the appropriate operative corridor along the long axis of the mass to minimize brain retraction and transgression.
随着病变向深部进展，手术角度比单一的显露范围更重要。	As the lesion’s depth advances, the operative working angles become more important than the simple extent of exposure.
因此，重建的轴位、矢状位和冠状位的MRI图像能为术者提供进入脑室位置的必要信息。	Therefore, reconstructed axial, sagittal, and coronal MRI planes are pertinent for providing the operator with the necessary information for the point of entry into the ventricle.
必须多角度分析肿瘤。	The tumor must be analyzed from multiple angles.
脑室内肿瘤通常会有脑脊液像帽子一样包绕肿瘤。	Intraventricular lesions typically have a “cap” of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) surrounding the tumor.
因为这些病变在被确诊之前都长得很大，正常的解剖可能已经被破坏并且在术前很难识别。	As these lesions tend to reach large sizes before their identification, normal anatomy may be distorted and often difficult to identify preoperatively.
重要的脑室静脉比如丘纹静脉应该特别注意。	Special attention is required to study imperative ventricular veins such as the thalamostriate veins.
脑室表面皮质的功能也影响着手术入路的选择。	The functionality of the overlying cortices plays an important role in defining the operative approach.
肿瘤的血供状态有可能增加手术的风险，因为深邃狭窄的手术通道限制了汹涌出血的控制效率。	The vascularity of the tumor can increase the risk of operation because the deep narrow surgical corridor hinders efficient management of torrential bleeding.
大多数脑室肿瘤并无症状而被偶然发现。	Most ventricular tumors are asymptomatic and found incidentally.
这些肿瘤如果首次影像学检查符合良性肿瘤或者缓慢生长的表现（室管膜下瘤），那么可能采用连续影像学随访的方式来处理。	These tumors may be treated expectantly with serial imaging if the initial imaging findings are consistent with a benign or slow-growing tumor (i.e., subependymoma).
而对一个诊断明确的症状性脑室肿瘤患者，一线治疗是手术完全切除来获得可靠的诊断，减轻肿瘤的占位效应，使其未来进一步生长的风险降到最低。	Following identification of a symptomatic ventricular tumor, the first-line therapy is complete surgical resection to make a reliable diagnosis, alleviate tumor mass effect, and minimize the risk of future growth.
而这一治疗原则对于松果体区肿块是例外的，该区肿瘤术前通常要求脑脊液分析或者立体定向/内镜活检进一步评估以便排除无须手术的生殖细胞瘤。	The exception to this management principle is treatment of pineal region masses, which often require either CSF analysis or stereotactic/endoscopic biopsy for further evaluation to rule out a nonoperative germ cell tumor before surgical resection.
因为这些肿瘤的自然病史进展缓慢，所以手术干预的时间点也可选择。	The timeframe for surgical intervention is elective because of the slowly progressive nature usually found with these lesions.
但是，诊断为急性瘤内出血和急性梗阻性脑积水被认为属于急症，正确的做法是立刻手术干预切除肿瘤或者脑室穿刺术。	However, diagnosis of acute intratumoral hemorrhage or acute obstructive hydrocephalus is considered an emergency, and immediate surgical intervention in the form of resection or ventriculostomy is warranted, respectively.
手术入路的选择受多种因素影响。	A number of factors influence the choice of operative corridor.
因为进入这样的深部病灶必须切除一些正常的脑组织，选择手术入路对患者的最终预后意义重大。	Because some transgression of normal brain is necessary to reach these deep lesions, the selection of the operative corridor plays an important role in the final outcome of the patient.
必须谨慎并客观的平衡每一个手术入路的优缺点。	The risks and benefits of each corridor must be carefully and objectively balanced.
笔者认为在处理脑室肿瘤和选择一个安全的手术入路之前应该仔细分析如下几点（按重要性排序）：	I believe the following considerations (listed in the order of importance) should be carefully analyzed before tackling an intraventricular tumor and selecting a safe operative access route:
最小化切除和牵拉正常或有功能的脑组织，	minimal transgression and retraction of normal/functional brain,
允许有效全切肿瘤的宽阔的工作角度，	expanded working angles to allow effective gross total tumor resection,
早期显露重要结构并获得肿瘤的血供控制，和	early exposure of vital structures and access to the tumor’s blood supply, and
手术入路的技术难度。	the technical difficulty of the operative route.
你可以发现手术入路的技术难度是最不重要的因素。	You can see that the technical complexity of the approach is the least important consideration.
因肿瘤位于深部，为了避免切除脑组织，术者可以开拓性设计新的手术入路。	Deep seated lesions provide the most opportunity for the operator to be innovative in designing new operative approaches to avoid brain transgression.
举例来说，当脑室内肿瘤偏离中线时，对侧半球间入路提供了更灵活的角度且减少了同侧脑组织的牵拉。	For example, contralateral interhemispheric approaches provide more flexible angles to the intraventricular tumors located away from the midline under less ipsilateral brain retraction.
入路的复杂性要求对肿瘤进行彻底的术前影像学评估并获取足以术中导航的MRI数据。	The complexity of the approach warrants thorough preoperative radiographic evaluation of the tumor and acquisition of MRI data sufficient for intraoperative navigation.
肿瘤通常扭曲原本复杂的脑室解剖，但是仍能在内镜辅助下顺利辨认。	The complex ventricular anatomy, often distorted by the neoplasm, can also be navigated with the assistance of an endoscope.
而且，内镜辅助下的显微外科能扩大经狭窄的手术通道获得的手术显露。	Moreover, the operative reach through narrow operative corridors can be extended using endoscopic-assisted microsurgery.
影响三脑室壁的肿瘤要求行术前内分泌和神经眼科学检查。	Tumors that affect the third ventricular wall require preoperative endocrinologic and neuro-ophthalmologic evaluation.
四脑室尾侧的肿瘤应该进行耳鼻喉科评估后组颅神经功能。	Caudal fourth ventricular lesions should have otolaryngologic assessment of the lower cranial nerves’ function.
术中一般注意事项	General Intraoperative Considerations
患者体位取决于选择的手术入路。	Choice of patient positioning depends on the chosen operative approach.
可以采用侧卧位以便矢状缝平行于地面。	The supine or lateral position may be used so that the sagittal suture is parallel to the floor.
在这种头位下，大脑镰将对侧半球阻挡在手术通道之外，与此同时，重力牵拉同侧半球能扩大半球间手术通道。	With this head configuration, the falx can hold the contralateral hemisphere out of the surgeon’s way while gravity retraction can expand the interhemispheric corridor.
侧脑室病变的切除可能需要比一般手术更长的时间，因此，患者位于手术床上的所有受压点都应该用软垫垫开保护。	Resection of lateral ventricular lesions may require longer than average operative times, so all of the pressure points should be well padded during patient positioning on the operating room table.
骨瓣的位置制约着进入脑室的通道；为进入侧脑室中线部位通常需显露上矢状窦。	The location of the bone flap affects access to the ventricle; the superior sagittal sinus is often unroofed for access to the midline lateral ventricular lesions.
脑积水会导致周围白质纤维束扭曲和拉伸，在手术操作或牵拉时就更容易受损。	Hydrocephalus can cause distortion and stretch of the surrounding white matter tracts, making them more susceptible to injury from operative manipulation or retraction.
笔者通常在手术早期（如分离纵裂）使用腰大池或者脑室引流来减压脑组织。	I often use a lumbar or ventricular drainage catheter to decompress the brain during the early stages of the operation (i.e., interhemispheric dissection).
脑室外引流管可放置在手术入路的对侧防止它对手术切口的影响或者突然脱落移位。	The ventricular catheter may be placed opposite the side of operative approach to prevent its interference with the incision and its accidental dislodgement.
对于经皮质入路而言，为躲避功能区皮质及其相应的白质传导束应该小心计划皮质切口。	For transcortical routes, the cortical incision must be carefully planned to avoid eloquent cortices and their corresponding white matter tracts.
沿脑沟和脑裂达到肿瘤对皮质的牵拉最小，路径虽长但是更安全，也更有助于保护神经功能。	Longer but safer pathways to the lesion along with incisions through the sulci and fissures while minimizing cortical retraction all help preserve neurologic function.
术中电生理监测在脑室手术时有一定价值，因为脑室周围结构（如丘脑和脑干）在手术操作时容易受损。	Intraoperative electrophysiologic monitoring plays a role in ventricular surgery because of the vulnerability of the periventricular structures, such as the thalamus and brainstem, to operative manipulations.
特殊的监测模式包括运动诱发电位、感觉诱发电位和脑干听觉诱发电位。	Specific modalities to monitor include motor, somatosensory, and brainstem auditory evoked potentials.
任何一个参数的下降都应引起术者的快速反应，重新考虑是否进一步切除脑组织、重新放置牵开器、立即减压快速扩大的瘤内出血或者引流脑脊液。	A decline in any of these parameters should evoke a rapid response by the surgeon. These responses may include reconsideration of further brain transgression, repositioning of the retractor blade, briskly debulking an acutely expanding intralesional hemorrhagic mass, or CSF drainage.
因为脑室手术时工作距离长，并且需要切除脑组织，所以基于MRI数据的导航对于准确定位经皮质或经胼胝体的切口以及成功进入脑室非常重要。	Because of the long working distance and the need for brain transgression in ventricular surgery, the use of MRI-based navigation is critical for precise localization of the transcortical or transcallosal incisions and successful ventricular navigation.
在一些病例中因为脑室内脑脊液引流后脑组织发生移位，选择性使用术中超声可弥补MRI导航的误差。	Intraoperative ultrasonography can complement MRI-based navigation in select cases to account for brain shift after ventricular CSF drainage.
脑室系统持续性出血是不应该出现的局面。	The staining of the ventricular system with blood has undesirable ramifications.
因此，手术早期控制病变的血供十分重要，这样有利于在狭窄深邃的脑室通道内分块切除肿瘤而保持术野干净。	Therefore, it is important to control the lesion’s vascular supply early in dissection to allow piecemeal resection in deep and narrow but pristine transventricular operative corridors.
应该用棉片将术野和剩余的脑室系统孤立开，这样就可避免出血引流进入其他脑室空间。	The rest of the ventricular system should be isolated from the operative field using cotton patties to avoid drainage and entry of blood in other ventricular cavities.
盲目过度的牵拉周围正常脑组织和任意地电凝脑室壁是导致术后新发神经功能障碍的最常见两个原因，必须予以避免。	Indiscriminate excessive retraction on the surrounding normal brain and impulsive bipolar coagulation of the ventricular walls are two of the most common causes of new postoperative deficits and must be avoided.
而当术者面对汹涌的出血，在深邃的手术通道中漫无目的地尝试改善视野并快速止血时，常常会发生这样的错误操作。	These maneuvers often occur in reaction to torrential bleeding when the operator is aimlessly trying to improve visualization in a deep operative corridor and abruptly stop bleeding.
在发生出血时保护室间孔十分重要。	It is important to protect the foramen of Monro when bleeding occurs.
在室间孔放置一个棉片防止出血注满脑室。	Placing a cotton patty at the foramen prevents blood from pooling in the ventricles.
在关颅之前必须识别并控制所有的出血点。	All bleeding areas should be identified and controlled prior to closure.
但这并不意味着过度的电凝脑室壁，相反，当存在静脉性渗血时可采用冲洗来达到止血并清洁术野的目的。	This caveat does not mean aggressive coagulation of the walls, but rather patient use of irrigation to achieve hemostasis and clear the field when venous oozing occurs.
因重要的间脑结构静脉侧枝循环很少，为防止其静脉性梗塞，必须保留足够的引流静脉。	Adequate venous drainage is important to prevent venous infarction of the vital diencephalic structures with minimal venous collaterals.
并没有一个清晰可靠的原则来判断哪些静脉应该被保留，而另外一些静脉可以被安全的切断。	There are no clear and reliable principles to determine which veins should be preserved and which can be safely sacrificed.
术前血管造影可以提供关于脑室和整个手术上优势静脉及其定位的宝贵信息。	Preoperative angiograms can provide valuable information about the location and dominance of the veins along the operative trajectory and within the ventricles.
如果需要牺牲一根透明隔静脉可能是安全的。	One of the septal veins may be safely sacrificed if necessary.
丘纹静脉和大脑内静脉是必不可少的血管。	Thalamostriate and internal cerebral veins are indispensable.
笔者认为切断一侧的丘纹静脉没有必要或者也不安全。	I do not believe unilateral sacrifice of a thalamostriate vein is either safe or necessary.
大多数脑室病变是良性并且生长缓慢的肿瘤。	Most ventricular lesions are benign and slow-growing tumors.
如果病变侵犯深部结构如脑室壁、穹隆、丘脑或者基底节区，次全切除可能比全切除更合适。	Subtotal resection may be preferable to complete resection if the lesion involves deep structures such as ventricular walls, the fornices, thalamus, or basal ganglia.
如果病变内侧黏连，术者应该留下一些肿瘤来保护穹隆。	If lesions have medial attachments, the surgeon may need to protect the fornix by leaving some tumor behind.
应该尽可能避免骚扰穹隆系统，因为即便是微小的穹隆损伤也会导致记忆障碍的风险骤升。	Manipulation of the foniceal systems should be minimized because of the high risk of memory dysfunction, even after their minimal injury.
脑室系统解剖的复杂性要求专门的章节来阐述。	The complexity of the ventricular anatomy demands a dedicated chapter.
请参考《脑室系统解剖》一章进一步了解。	Please refer to the Anatomy of the Ventricular System chapter for further details.
手术入路概述	Overview of Surgical Approaches
为讨论脑室手术的入路，笔者基于各个脑室总结如下技术要点。	To discuss the approaches for intraventricular surgery, I have organized the techniques based on the ventricle of interest.
接下来笔者将逐一简明扼要地描述这些入路的优缺点。	These approaches are briefly described below with an emphasis on the advantages and disadvantages for each.
关于各个入路的的详细讨论参见各自的章节。	Further in-depth discussions of the individual approaches are found in the respective chapters.
侧脑室的手术入路	Surgical Approaches to the Lateral Ventricle
侧脑室内病变位置（前方、前外侧或后方）将决定最适合的手术路线。	The position of the lesion within the lateral ventricle will determine the most appropriate operative trajectory, either anterior, anterolateral, or posterior.
必须通过大脑半球（经皮质）或者胼胝体（经胼胝体）才能到达脑室腔。	This necessitates passing through either the cerebral hemisphere (transcortical) or corpus callosum (transcallosal) to reach the ventricular lumen.
由于工作距离很长，工作空间狭小，所以不应低估灵活的工作角度的重要性。	Since the working distance is long and the working space is narrow, the importance of flexible working angles cannot be understated.
最切实可行的角度就是沿着肿瘤的长轴达到肿瘤。	These angles are most practical when the lesion is approached along its long axis.
经皮质入路与经胼胝体入路孰优孰劣尚在激烈讨论中。	The superiority of transcortical over transcallosal approaches is highly controversial.
经皮质入路理论上的优越性如下：避开矢状窦旁静脉，不需要冗长乏味的半球间蛛网膜分离。	The theoretical advantages of the transcortical approach are as follows: the parasagittal veins are not a concern, and tedious interhemispheric arachnoid dissection is not required.
然而，该入路破坏了额叶的投射纤维。	However, the projection fibers in the frontal lobe are disrupted.
笔者认为经皮质入路缺乏灵活的工作角度（前方经额与前方经胼胝体相比较）。	I believe transcortical trajectories (anterior transfrontal versus anterior transcallosal) have less flexible working angles.
一些研究认为经皮质入路增加了术后癫痫的风险；然而，这一研究结果没有被随后的研究证实。	Some studies have suggested that the transcortical approach increases the risk of postoperative seizures; however, this finding has not been conclusively confirmed by subsequent studies.
最重要的是，应该谨慎并策略性规划皮质和胼胝体切口，这样不仅能减少术后神经功能缺陷的风险，同时能提供足够宽广的手术通道显露并全切除侧脑室内的病变。	Most importantly, the cortical or callosal incisions should be carefully and strategically planned to lessen the risk of postoperative deficits while providing a sufficiently wide operative passage for exposure and gross total resection of the lateral ventricular lesion.
关于这一手术入路相关原则的讨论和更多详尽的细节参考《侧脑室肿瘤》一章。	For more discussion of these principles and more extensive details on the relevant approaches, see the Lateral Ventricular Tumors chapter.
表2：基于侧脑室病变部位的手术入路——侧脑室入路	Table 2: Suggested Approaches for Location-Specific Access within the Lateral Ventricle
对于严格居于中线没有明显的外侧扩展的病变经胼胝体入路是理想的手术入路。	Transcallosal approaches are ideal for strictly midline lesions without significant lateral expansion.
经前纵裂胼胝体入路有利于进入侧脑室额角和体部，还能显露三脑室。	The anterior interhemispheric transcallosal approach facilitates access to the frontal horn and body of the lateral ventricle, in addition to exposure of the third ventricle.
当肿瘤在同侧向外发展远离中线并进入额角时不适合该入路，	Extensive lateral expansion of the tumor on the ipsilateral side, away from the midline, within the frontal horn is a contraindication to the use of this approach.
而经皮质或者对侧经胼胝体入路通常更适合这一情况。	Transcortical or contralateral transcallosal trajectories are often more appropriate.
肿瘤向双侧生长并远离中线提示需要采用经顶间沟入路沿病变长轴显露之。	Bilateral tumor extensions away from the midline indicate the need for the intraparietal transsulcal approach to expose the lesion along its long axis.
术者应该避免损伤内囊膝部，它与室间孔仅有一薄层脑室壁相隔并位于室间孔外侧。	The surgeon should avoid injuring the genu of the internal capsule, located lateral to the foramen of Monro and separated by a thin layer of the ventricular capsule.
值的关注的是丘纹静脉在此处走向内侧并汇入大脑内静脉。	This location is also significant because it is where the thalamostriate vein orients medially to anastomose with the internal cerebral vein.
图2：显示大脑前纵裂经胼胝体入路的基本原则。	Figure 2: The basic principles of the anterior interhemispheric transcallosal approach are illustrated.
尽管存在脑积水，笔者在分离纵裂时使用腰大池引流使脑牵拉最小化。	Despite the presence of hydrocephalus, I use lumbar drainage to minimize brain retraction during interhemispheric dissection.
可根据病灶在脑室的位置适度调整骨窗的前后位置。	The anteroposterior location of the craniotomy may be slightly adjusted based on the location of the tumor within the ventricle.
这一入路到达的范围用绿色阴影展示（插图）。	The reach of this approach is shaded in green (inset image).
侧卧位可利用重力牵拉。	Lateral position allows the use of gravity retraction.
经额叶皮质入路（经额中回）	Transfrontal Transcortical Approach (via Middle Frontal Gyrus)
病变主体位于并局限在额角时可采用前方经额叶皮质入路切除病变。	The anterior transfrontal transcortical approach is an acceptable technique for resection of lesions that are mainly limited to and filling the frontal horn.
这是一个经额中回造瘘的皮质入路。	This technique involves a transcortical approach through the middle frontal gyrus.
病变位于非主侧半球且脑室扩大时尤其适用该入路。	It is ideal for patients with large ventricles and nondominant lesions.
与经胼胝体入路相比较，前方经皮质入路避开了矢状窦旁静脉和纵裂分离，但是它破坏了一些额叶的连合纤维和投射纤维。	Compared with the transcallosal approach, the anterior transcortical approach potentially spares the parasagittal veins and interhemispheric dissection, but it disrupts some of the frontal commissural and projection fibers.
图3:经额叶皮质入路提供了额角和室间孔的显露。	Figure 3: The transfrontal transcortical approach provides exposure of the frontal horn and the foramen of Monro.
该入路的后界和外侧界受到限制，它最适合主体位于额角和室间孔的病变。	The posterior and lateral limits of this approach are restrictive and best suited for lesions predominantly residing in the frontal horn and the foramen of Monro.
经后纵裂胼胝体入路	Posterior Interhemispheric Transcallosal Approach
这一入路的设计是为了达到脑室体部后方。	This approach is designed to reach the posterior body of the ventricle.
大的松果体区占位伴有幕上扩展时也能采用这一入路有效显露。	This route can also be effective for exposing large pineal region masses with supratentorial extension.
该手术入路不用切除胼胝体压部，只需要切开胼胝体后部一小部分。	The splenium is spared, and only a small section of the posterior aspect of the corpus callosum is transected.
图4：经后纵裂胼胝体入路刚好在压部前方切开胼胝体，而压部是必须保护的。	Figure 4: The posterior interhemispheric transcallosal approach exploits a callosotomy just anterior to the splenium that must be preserved.
该入路也能显露三脑室后部和向头侧扩展的大型松果体区肿瘤。	This route also exposes posterior third ventricular and large pineal region tumors with cranial extension.
经顶叶皮质入路（经顶上或顶下小叶）	Transparietal Transcortical Approach (via Superior or Inferior Parietal Lobule)
笔者的很多同事们采用经顶上小叶皮质入路显露脑室后部病变。	The transparietal transcortical route via the superior parietal lobe is used by many of my colleagues for exposing posterior ventricular lesions.
这一入路的变形之一是经顶间沟到达三角区和房部。	The variant of this approach through the intraparietal sulcus is used to reach the trigone or atrium.
这些入路的缺点在于切开皮质下白质纤维会导致神经功能障碍。	The disadvantages of both approaches are the neurologic deficits that can result from dissection of the underlying white matter fibers.
在主侧半球，手术经顶上小叶或者顶下小叶（颞顶连接）可能会导致阅读障碍、失写症、计算力缺失、视野缺损和牵拉破坏角回后导致的手指失认（Gerstmann syndrome，译者注），而在非主侧半球，同样的手术入路会导致视觉空间信息的记忆障碍、淡漠和视野缺失。	Approaching through the dominant superior or inferior (temporoparietal junction) parietal lobule can result in dyslexia, agraphia, acalculia, visual field deficits, and finger agnosia due to retracting or traversing the angular gyrus. In the nondominant hemisphere, the same approach can result in impaired memory of visual-spatial information, neglect, and visual field deficits.
笔者更倾向选择对侧经纵裂-大脑镰-楔前叶入路来到达房部和三角区周围。	I prefer the contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach for accessing the periatrial and peritrigonal regions.
对侧经纵裂-大脑镰-楔前叶入路	Contralateral Interhemispheric Transfalcine Transprecuneus Approach
请参考关于对侧经纵裂-大脑镰-楔前叶入路一章获得更多的信息。	Please refer to the chapter on the contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach for more information.
这是一个非常灵活的入路，它适用于位于房部和侵犯房部内侧壁的大肿瘤。	This is a very flexible route for large lesions within the atrium and affecting the medial wall of the periatrium.
图5：顶叶病变包括沿房部内侧壁生长的动静脉畸形在内都适合应用对侧经纵裂-大脑镰-楔前叶入路。	Figure 5: The contralateral interhemispheric transfalcine transprecuneus approach is ideal for periatrial lesions, including arteriovenous malformations along the medial wall of the atrium.
同侧后纵裂经扣带回/楔前叶入路	Posterior Ipsilateral Interhemispheric Transcingulate/Transprecuneus Approach
同侧后纵裂经扣带回/楔前叶入路对于病变位于房部和枕角内侧壁来说是一个合理的选择。	The posterior interhemispheric transcingulate/transprecuneus approach is a reasonable option for lesions within the medial wall of the atrium and occipital horn.
这一入路的优点在于术者能避免接触沿枕角和房部的侧脑室壁走行的视放射后段。	The advantage of this approach is that the surgeon is able to avoid contact with the posterior segment of the optic radiation along the lateral ventricular capsule of the atrium and occipital horn.
因为存在矢状窦旁桥静脉的牵制和脑组织牵拉损伤的风险，该入路外侧界受到限制。	The lateral reach of this trajectory is limited because of the risk of retraction injury and presence of tethering parasagittal veins.
颞前皮质切除术	Anterior Temporal Neocortical Resection
这是笔者喜欢用来切除颞角前部和中部病变（位于大脑脚平面之前）的入路之一。	This approach is one of my favorite routes for reaching the anterior and middle temporal horn lesions (anterior to the plane of the cerebral peduncle).
无论在优势半球还是非优势半球侧，患者均能很好耐受非常有限的颞前皮质切除（2.5-3cm），并且该入路的显露非常优秀。	Very limited anterior temporal resection (~2.5–3cm) is well tolerated in dominant and nondominant hemispheres and provides excellent exposure.
经皮质入路到达颞角的其他变化形式（见下文）导致更广泛的颞叶中部附近的皮质切除，而这些皮质通常是语言功能区。	Other variations of the transcortical approaches to the temporal horn (see below) lead to more extensive cortical transgression around the midsection of the lobe where language function is more prevalent.
图6：颞前皮质切除术能提供必须显露的颞角前部、杏仁核、钩回和海马等结构。	Figure 6: Anterior temporal neocortical resection can provide the necessary exposure for the anterior part of the temporal horn, amygdala, uncus and hippocampus.
斜形或者垂直的手术角度甚至可以到达颞角中后部和与此相关的结构。	The oblique or tangential operative trajectory can even reach the mid to posterior part of the horn and associated structures.
经颞叶皮质入路（经颞中回）	Transtemporal Transcortical Approach (via Middle Temporal Gyrus)
通过颞中回皮质切开术获得经颞叶皮质通道已经被用于显露颞角中部和海马。	The transtemporal transcortical pathway via the middle temporal gyrus corticotomy has been employed for reaching the midsection of the temporal horn and hippocampus.
这一入路的缺点是切除颞中回和颞下回的中段导致相应的神经功能障碍。	Disadvantages of this approach relate to the neurodeficits resulting from the sacrifice of the middle part of the middle and inferior temporal gyri.
尽管手术开始仅切开了一小片皮质，但是到完全切除肿瘤时，周围皮质会遭受更广泛的牵拉损伤。	Although a small corticotomy is initially made, by the time the resection is complete more extensive retraction injury to the surrounding cortices is inflicted.
因为主侧半球的语言功能区会发生变异，切开颞中回的风险很高，需要在术中行皮质电刺激来可靠地判断功能区定位。	Approaching through the middle temporal gyrus is high-risk due to variations of the language map in the dominant hemisphere, requiring cortical stimulation mapping for reliable localization of function.
而非优势半球的这一手术入路可避免这一风险。	An approach through the nondominant hemisphere avoids this risk.
有限的颞前皮质切除（见上文）提供了到达颞角中部的斜形/正交的操作角度。	The limited anterior temporal lobe resection (see above) provides an adequate but oblique and tangential working angle to the mid portion of the temporal horn.
笔者认为这一入路创伤更小甚至没有什么不利影响。	I have witnessed minimal to no untoward effects using this approach.
图7：经主侧半球颞中回入路可能危及语言功能。	Figure 7: The transtemporal approach through the dominant middle temporal gyrus can endanger language.
在非主侧半球可以安全的使用。	It may be used safely for the nondominant lobe.
经颞叶脑沟入路（颞枕沟）	Transtemporal Transsulcal Approach (via Occipitotemporal Sulcus)
颞枕叶脑沟入路对于位于颞角后部的病变非常有用。	The occipitotemporal transsulcus approach is useful for lesions located posteriorly within the temporal horn.
这一入路的主要缺点是术后视野缺损的风险，上象限视野缺损最常见。	The major disadvantage of this approach is the risk of postoperative visual field deficits, most commonly a superior quadrant field deficit.
这一入路当病变位于主侧半球时并不理想。	This approach is not ideal, especially on the dominant hemisphere.
因此必须审慎评估这一入路的获益与风险。	Therefore benefits and risk of this approach must be considered judiciously.
笔者不使用这一入路。	I do not use this approach.
笔者倾向于选择小的颞前皮质切除术和一个与颞角中部相正交的手术通道。	I prefer the use of small anterior temporal neocortical resection and a tangential operative corridor to the middle portion of the temporal horn.
而对位于更后方的一些病变，如禽距周围，笔者采用小脑上经天幕经海马旁手术入路。	For more posteriorly situated lesions, around the area of the Calcar avis, I use the supracerebellar transtentorial transparahippocampal trajectory.
经侧裂入路	Transsylvian Approach
经侧裂入路也可用于到达颞角前部。	The transsylvian approach can also be used for accessing the anterior temporal horn.
历史上，这一入路用于海马杏仁核切除术。	Historically, this approach was implemented for amygdalohippocampectomies.
更多的详情参考选择性海马杏仁核切除术。	For more details see selective amygdalohippocampectomy.
这一入路的主要优点是用于杏仁核主体、海马前部和海马旁回边缘系统相关并向颞角扩展的肿瘤。	The major advantage of this approach pertains to the dominant amygdala, anterior hippocampal, and parahippocampal limbic tumors that extend into the temporal horn.
对于这些病变，经侧裂入路可以不损伤优势半球颞叶（上中下回）皮质而切除肿瘤。	For these lesions, the transsylvian approach permits resection without transgression of the dominant neocortex of the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri.
笔者谨慎地采用这一入路切除杏仁核主体和海马前部的小病灶。	I use this approach sparingly for small dominant amygdalar and anterior hippocampal lesions.
因为大脑中动脉分支必须在侧裂内操作并被移动，而这伴随着血管痉挛和损伤的风险；所以经侧裂入路充满挑战。	This approach is challenging because the middle cerebral artery branches must be mobilized and manipulated within the fissure with the attendant risks of vascular injury or spasm.
另外，手术操作通道限制在颞角前部，而缺乏足够的灵活性来应对肿瘤向颞角中部的扩展。	In addition, the working corridor is limited to the anterior temporal horn and is less flexible for lesions extending to the midsection of the horn.
总之，采用这一入路有太多的限制。	Overall, there are limited indications for the use of this corridor.
图8：经侧裂通道有限并且将大脑中动脉分支置于风险之中。	Figure 8: The transsylvian corridor is limited and places the middle cerebral artery branches at risk.
此图描述经侧裂入路切除右侧杏仁核和海马前部。	This sketch demonstrates the resection of the right amygdala and anterior hippocampus through this route.
并可见动眼神经。	The oculomotor nerve is apparent.
后纵裂经皮质入路到枕角	Posterior Interhemispheric Transcortical Approach to the Occipital Horn
半球间入路提供了到达枕角的通道。	This interhemispheric approach provides a pathway toward the occipital horn.
很多患者术前即有视野缺失，因此这些患者可以采用通过枕叶内侧的经皮质入路而不会导致新发的神经功能并发症。	Most patients suffer from preoperative visual deficits that allow a transcortical route through the medial occipital lobe without causing new neurologic complications.
图9：经纵裂皮质入路对不可逆转的视野障碍患者而言，是到达枕角合理的手术角度。	Figure 9: The interhemispheric trancortical approach to the occipital horn is a reasonable trajectory for reaching the horn among the patients who are suffering from irreversible visual dysfunction.
枕叶皮质切除术	Occipital Neocortical Resection
经枕叶皮质入路高度可能导致永久性同侧视野缺损。	This transcortical approach has a high likelihood of generating a permanent homonymous visual field deficit.
因此这一入路仅适用于术前已有不可逆转的同侧视野缺损并且不可能好转的患者。	Therefore this approach is only appropriate for patients with an irreversible pre-operative homonymous deficit without the likelihood of reversal.
三脑室病变的手术入路	Surgical Approaches to the Third Ventricle
三脑室病变是安全达到并有效切除的最具有挑战性的病变之一。	Third ventricular lesions are among the most challenging lesions to reach and resect safely and effectively.
这些肿瘤位于中线深部并且与很多重要结构包括垂体柄、视交叉、丘脑、下丘脑和大脑内静脉相毗邻。	The deep midline position of these tumors situates them adjacent to multiple vital structures including the pituitary stalk, optic chiasm, thalamus, hypothalamus and internal cerebral veins.
这一区域的手术要求对解剖一如既往地熟悉、一丝不苟的计划和高超的外科技术。	Surgery of this region requires pristine familiarity with the anatomy and scrupulous planning and surgical technique.
关于在三脑室手术的进一步讨论请参考章节《三脑室前部肿瘤》和《三脑室后部肿瘤》。	For further discussion of surgery within the third chamber, please see the chapters on the Anterior and Posterior Third Ventricular Tumors.
表3：三脑室内肿瘤手术入路的建议	Table 3: Suggested Approaches for Location-Specific Access within the Third Ventricle
三脑室手术入路	Third Ventricular Approaches
病变位置	Lesion Location
建议入路	Suggested Approaches
前部	Anterior
这是笔者喜欢的到达三脑室前部和中部病变的入路。	This is my favorite approach for reaching anterior and middle third ventricular lesions.
经胼胝体入路显露同侧侧脑室。	The trancallosal approach exposes the ipsilateral lateral ventricle.
然后，通过从丘纹静脉汇入点前方切断膈静脉来扩大室间孔。	Next, the foramen of Monroe is enlarged through transection of the septal vein and its disconnection from the thalamostriate vein.
这一操作不明显骚扰丘静脉和丘纹静脉而是通过前方一小段脉络膜分离来扩大室间孔。	This maneuver allows enlargement of the foramen through a minimal anterior transchoroidal dissection without significant manipulation of the thalamus or thalamostriate vein.
这一入路显然不适合非常靠后的病变，包括影响松果体区的病变也不适合。	This approach is not ideal for very posterior lesions including the ones affecting the pineal region.
请参考相应的章节《三脑室前部肿瘤》。	Please refer to the corresponding chapter on Anterior Third Ventricular Tumors.
图10：切断透明隔前静脉后围绕丘纹静脉经脉络膜分离，能非常满意的显露三脑室前部和中部。	Figure 10: The transection of the anterior septal vein and transchoroidal dissection around the thalamostriate vein provides an excellent exposure of the anterior and middle portions of the third ventricle.
前方经额叶皮质经室间孔入路	Anterior Transfrontal Transcortical Transforaminal Approach
这是一个到达三脑室最前方病变的合理入路。	This is a reasonable approach for reaching most anterior third ventricular lesions.
欲进一步了解相关内容，请参考胶样囊肿（经皮质入路）。	For further details, please see the chapter on Colloid Cyst (Trasncortical Approach).
将其与对应的经胼胝体入路相比较，经皮质入路显露在前后方向和内外方向的操作角度存在一定的限制，因此它适合诸如胶样囊肿这样的小病灶。	Compared to its transcallosal counterpart, its exposure is somewhat limited in its anteroposterior and lateral-medial working angles and is appropriate for smaller lesions such as colloid cysts.
无症状的肿瘤能通过对侧经室间孔角度（对角线）来达到肿瘤的外侧部分。	Asymmetric tumors can be tackled through a contralateral transforaminal trajectory (“cross-court route”) to reach the lateral aspect of the tumor.
前方经皮质入路也要求切断一些连合纤维和投射纤维。	The anterior transcortical approach also requires transection of some of the commissural and projection fibers.
但是，它保护胼胝体免受侵犯。	However, it spares the callosum.
图11：经皮质经室间孔入路能提供与相应的经胼胝体入路类似的显露。	Figure 11: The transcortical transforaminal approach can offer a similar exposure to the one provided by its transcallosal counterpart.
然而，切除向三脑室前部扩展的大肿瘤时显露就颇为受限。	However, the exposure is more limited for manipulation of large lesions extending beyond the anterior third ventricle.
注意进入了左侧侧脑室。	Note entry into the left lateral ventricle.
额下经终板入路	Subfrontal Translamina Terminalis Approach
病变位于三脑室前部，特别是位于连接导水管和室间孔前缘的平面之前时，这一入路是一个合理的选择。	This approach is a reasonable one for lesions that are within the anterior segment of the third ventricle, particularly those anterior to a plane running from the cerebral aqueduct to the anterior margin of the foramen of Monro.
当肿瘤经终板池扩展并合并有一小块鞍上部分时特别适合这一入路。	It is especially favorable if the tumor is extending through the lamina terminalis and has a smaller suprasellar component.
欲详细了解相关内容请参考该章《额下经终板入路》。	For further details, please refer to the chapter on Subfrontal Translamina Terminalis Approach.
肿瘤主体位于鞍上时可采用内镜下经鼻经蝶经终板入路，请参考《颅咽管瘤》一章。	Tumors with primarily suprasellar components are resected through the endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal translamina terminalis approach. Please see the chapter on Craniopharyngioma.
该入路的优点是可获得关于终板、视神经、视交叉、双侧颈内动脉、前交通动脉复合体、双侧A2段，双侧后交通动脉、相关的穿支血管和垂体柄的极佳的可视化效果。	This approach offers the advantage of providing excellent visualization of the lamina terminalis, optic nerves, optic chiasm, bilateral internal carotid arteries, anterior communicating artery complex, bilateral A2 segments, posterior communicating arteries, corresponding perforating branches, and the pituitary stalk.
然而，如果肿瘤没有扩大终板，经正常终板安全操作的空间和角度都不够灵活和受限，那么经这一入路切除肿瘤也将受到限制。	However, its reach for tumors that do not enlarge the lamina terminalis is limited as the safe working space and angles through the non-enlarged lamina terminalis is nonflexible and restricted.
整块全切肿瘤也是问题。	Gross total tumor resection can be problematic.
将这一入路转换为前纵裂入路可能会提供更加开阔的手术空间。	The anterior interhemispheric variation of this approach may provide more extended operative space.
图12：额下经终板入路提供了三脑室前方的有限显露。它适合应用于将终板和手术通道撑开的病变。	Figure 12: The subfrontal translamina terminalis approach provides limited exposure to the anterior third ventricle and is suitable for lesions enlarging the lamina terminalis and its operative pathway.
内镜经鼻经蝶经终板入路	Endoscopic Transnasal Transsphenoidal Translamina Terminalis Approach
切除鞍旁向三脑室扩展的病变时这一入路非常有用且合适。	This approach is very useful and favorable approach for resection of parasellar lesions with third ventricular extension.
这些肿瘤通常是颅咽管瘤、垂体腺瘤和Rathke’s囊肿。	These tumors are often craniopharyngiomas, pituitary adenomas and Rathke’s cleft cysts.
请参考该章《颅咽管瘤》进一步了解技术细节。	For further technical details, please refer to the chapter on Craniopharyngioma.
该入路的主要不利之处是难以充分显微分离致密肿瘤和三脑室壁、视神经或者穿支血管的黏连。	The major disadvantage of this approach is the difficulty in performing sufficient microdissection for tumors of dense consistency and adherence to the third ventricular wall, optic structures or perforating vessels.
最近内镜下显微手术器械的使用已经克服了这些限制。	These limitations have been recently overcome with the use of endoscopic microsurgical instruments.
图13：内镜下经鼻经蝶经终板入路能充分显露扩大终板的三脑室肿瘤。	Figure 13: The endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal translamina terminalis approach provides excellent exposure of third ventricular tumors that have enlarged the lamina terminalis.
这一通道平行于肿瘤的长轴并能通过一条微侵袭的通道有效的整块全切肿瘤。	This corridor is parallel to the long axis of the tumor and allows effective gross total tumor resection through a minimally invasive pathway.
后纵裂经胼胝体经静脉/静脉旁入路	Posterior Interhemispheric Transcallosal Transvenous/Paravenous Variant
后纵裂经胼胝体经静脉或静脉旁改良入路适用于主体位于脑室后部、四叠体和松果体区的病变。	Posterior interhemispheric transcallosal transvenous/paravenous variant is appropriate for lesions primarily within the posterior third ventricle, quadrigeminal plate and pineal region.
它提供了大脑内静脉后部、直窦、Galen静脉和松果体区周围独一无二的合适术野。	It provides a unique and suitable surgical field for the area around the posterior internal cerebral veins, straight sinus, vein of Galen, and pineal region.
额叶后部的窦旁静脉是不可或缺的；切断或者骚扰这些血管有导致静脉性梗死的可能。	Parasagittal veins are more indispensible in the posterior frontal region; their sacrifice and manipulation can predispose to venous infarction.
这一入路的其他不足包括损伤胼胝体后部纤维。	Other disadvantages to this approach include injury to the posterior corpus callosum fibers.
尽管保留了胼胝体压部，听觉障碍、遗忘症、缄默症和阅读障碍的风险仍然存在。	Despite preservation of the splenium, the risk of auditory deficits, amnesia, mutism, and dysplexia still exists.
在切开胼胝体后，笔者在大脑内静脉间（经静脉）或者附近（静脉旁）进行操作。	After transection of the corpus callosum, I work between (intervenous) or around (paravenous) internal cerebral veins.
这些静脉在三脑室顶部后方分开，并且常被肿瘤进一步推移远离彼此。	These veins diverge within the posterior roof of the third ventricle and are often further displaced away from each other by the tumor.
这一入路可能会损伤四叠体，由此导致眼外肌运动障碍，严重时可出现完全性暂时性Parinaud’s综合征。	Extraocular movement dysfunction ranging in severity up to complete temporary Parinaud’s syndrome, can result from injury of the quadrigeminal plate during this approach.
这一入路其他可能的后遗症包括癫痫和偏瘫，但多数是暂时的。	Other sequela of the procedure includes seizures and hemiparesis, most temporary.
进一步了解相关信息可参考《三脑室后部肿瘤》一章。	For further details, please refer to the chapter on Posterior Third Ventricular Tumors.
图14：后纵裂经胼胝体经静脉间入路是一个显露三脑室后部的切实可行的入路。	Figure 14: The posterior interhemispheric transcallosal intervenous variant is a practical route for exposing the posterior third ventricle.
两侧穹隆柱在这一位置已经相互分开，通常没有损伤的风险。	The columns of fornix have diverged away from each other at this location and are not usually at risk.
小脑上经脑室入路	Supracerebellar Transventricular Approach
天幕下小脑上入路对于小的三脑室后部病变有极大的用途，如海绵状血管瘤，甚至病变主体并不位于松果体区也适用。	The infratentorial supracerebellar approach has great utility for small posterior third ventricular lesions, such as cavernous malformations, even if the lesion is not primarily within the pineal region.
这一入路的优点是显而易见的，包括对毗邻结构的微小侵袭和保护胼胝体。	The advantages of this approach are substantial and include minimal injury to the adjacent structures and conservation of the corpus callosum.
丘脑枕可以被轻柔的操作而没有明显的影响。	The pulvinar can be gently manipulated without significant effects.
关于这一入路的进一步细节请参考《小脑上经脑室入路》一章。	For further details, refer to the Supracerebellar Transventricular Approach chapter.
这一入路的不利之处包括易损伤僵联合、Galen静脉和四叠体。	The disadvantages of this approach include the vulnerability of the habenula, vein of Galen, and quadrigeminal plate.
如果损伤了这些结构，后遗症可能包括永久性缄默和认知能力受损。	If damaged, the sequela can include permanent mutism and cognitive impairment.
图15：小的三脑室后部肿瘤能通过小脑上入路显露。	Figure 15: Small posterior third ventricular tumors can be exposed through the supracerebellar route.
必须小心谨慎地研究术前影像来评估深部静脉的位置（Galen静脉等）和这一入路的可行性。	A careful study of preoperative imaging is necessary to evaluate the location of the deep veins (vein of Galen, etc) and the feasibility of this approach.
枕叶半球间经天幕入路	Occipital Interhemispheric Transtentorial Approach
枕叶半球间经天幕入路被设计用来切除三脑室后部和松果体区病变。	The occipital interhemispheric transtentorial approach is designed to reach posterior third ventricular and pineal region lesions.
这一入路的不利之处包括容易损伤枕叶、直窦及其汇入静脉和胼胝体压部。	The disadvantages of this approach include the vulnerability of the occipital lobe, straight sinus and its anastomosing veins, and the splenium.
损伤这些结构表现为认知能力受损，视野缺损和罕见的裂脑综合征。	The injury to these structures consists of cognitive impairment, visual field deficits, and in rare instances split brain syndrome.
因为上述并发症的真实风险，笔者不使用这一入路。	I have not used this approach because of the real risk of above complications.
前纵裂经胼胝体经穹隆间入路	Anterior Interhemispheric Transcallosal Interforniceal Approach
这一入路用于位于三脑室前部至中部的病变。	This approach has utility for lesions within the anterior to mid segment of the third ventricle.
这一入路的不利之处在于破坏穹隆投射纤维潜在风险。	The disadvantages of this approach are the potential for disruption of forniceal projection fibers.
然而，一些肿瘤侵蚀或者使穹窿体变薄，这时最适合使用这一入路。	However, some tumors erode through or attenuate the forniceal raphe and make this approach ideal.
另外，透明隔间腔的存在也有利于这一入路。	In addition, the presence of cavum septum pellucidum can be helpful.
关于这一入路的详细讨论请参照《经胼胝体经穹隆间入路》一章。	For further details, refer to the Transcallosal Interforniceal Approach chapter.
为避免损伤穹隆纤维，术者必须时刻警醒对脑室、脑室旁结构和中线结构的牵拉。	To avoid injury to the forniceal fibers, the surgeon must be cognizant of retraction force on ventricular, paraventricular, and midline structures.
穹隆纤维损伤的结果包括短暂和/或永久的缄默和认知力受损。	Consequences of forniceal fiber injury include transient and/or permanent amnesia and cognitive impairment.
四脑室的手术入路	Surgical Approaches to the Fourth Ventricle
尽管相较三脑室占位简单些，但是四脑室占位与脑干的关系密切，仍是有挑战性的手术；肿瘤可以简单的推移脑干也可侵袭脑干软膜。	Fourth ventricular tumors pose a surgical challenge, albeit less than their third ventricular counterparts, due to their relation to the brainstem; this relation can vary from simply displacement to invasion.
肿瘤经常被一些重要的结构所包绕，这使肿瘤切除更加艰难。这些重要的结构包括小脑扁桃体、小脑半球和/或小脑蚓部。	This challenge is further complicated by the tumor often being concealed by key cerebellar structures including the cerebellar tonsils, cerebellar hemispheres, and/or the vermis.
肿瘤会经Luschka孔生长侵犯远隔空间，比如延髓前池、小脑延髓池、桥前池和脊髓前池。	Tumors can involve remote spaces, through extension within the foramen of Luschka, such as the premedullary, cerebellomedullary, prepontine, and anterior spinal cisterns.
肿瘤向远隔生长能加快对后循环血管分支和相应穿支及后组颅神经的包裹。	These extensions can facilitate involvement of the posterior circulation branches and perforators, including the cranial nerves.
在四脑室手术中，术者必须意识到这些结构及其准确的定位。	The operator must be cognizant of these structures and their exact location during fourth ventricular surgery.
关于这些基本原则的讨论，请参考《四脑室肿瘤》一章。	For further discussion of these principles, see the Fourth Ventricular Tumors chapter.
在以前，四脑室肿瘤的手术入路需要小脑半球切除或者蚓部劈开。	Historically, the approach to the fourth ventricular tumors involved either cerebellar hemisphere resection or vermian split.
后者会导致蚓部劈开综合征，并特征性的表现为神经行为异常、平衡障碍和小脑性缄默。	The latter has a real risk of vermian split syndrome, which is characterized by neurobehavioral abnormalities, imbalance and cerebellar mutism.
为了避免这些并发症，已开发了一个可供选择的入路（膜帆入路）。	In an attempt to avoid these complications, an alternative approach (telovelar route) has been designed.
膜帆或经小脑延髓裂入路	Telovelar or transcerebellomedullary Fissure Approach
这是曾经的经小脑入路或经蚓部入路的替代入路。	This approach serves as an alternative to the historical transcerebellar or tansvermian approaches.
它能明显减少正常结构的破坏并有利于四脑室的宽敞显露。	It facilitates generous exposure of the fourth ventricular space with significantly less disruption of normal structures.
欲进一步了解详情，请参考《颅脑手术入路》专栏中的《膜帆入路》一章。	For further details, please refer to the chapter on Telovelar Approach in the Cranial Approaches volume.
图16：膜帆入路以最小的损伤提供了非常有效的达到四脑室的途径。	Figure 16: The telovelar approach provides the least invasive and most effective route to the fourth ventricle.
对于合并明显的头侧扩展至上髓帆和松果体区附近的四脑室大肿瘤，微小的蚓部劈开是安全的。	For large fourth ventricular tumors with significant cranial extension around the superior medullary velum and the pineal region, a small inferior vermian split is safe.
联合膜帆入路和小脑上入路也是可以选择的一种尝试。	Alternatively, a combined telovelar and supracerebellar approach can be attempted.
必须充分的冲洗脑室系统，防止术后梗阻性脑积水。	Generous irrigation of the ventricular system is imperative to prevent ventricular obstruction postoperatively.
小片的止血材料（如止血纱和明胶海绵碎片）不要留在脑室内；移除它们可使术后急性脑积水的风险降至最低。	Small pieces of hemostatic material (i.e., SURGICEL or Gelfoam powder) cannot be left behind; their removal will minimize the risk of acute postoperative hydrocephalus.
建议有选择的进行透明隔和终板造瘘，可能会避免术后永久性脑脊液分流的必要性。	Fenestration of the septum pellucidum and lamina terminalis (in select cases) is advised, and may obviate a need for postoperative permanent CSF diversion.
在手术结束时应该用温水冲洗并置换脑脊液，这样可防止大脑半球塌陷和硬膜下积液的发生。	Cerebral spinal fluid should be replaced with warm irrigation at the conclusion of the case to prevent hemispheric collapse and development of subdural fluid collections.
患者术后应该严密监测急性进展的出血、脑积水和硬膜下血肿。	Patients should be closely monitored postoperatively for acute development of hemorrhage, hydrocephalus, and subdural hematomas.
一些特定患者可在脑室内留置导管监测颅内压力并引流脑室内手术相关的碎屑。	In select patients, a catheter should be left in the ventricle to monitor intracranial pressure and drain intraventricular debris related to surgery.
术后24h内，应该扫描CT评估脑出血、脑室大小、无症状性缺血或水肿、以及明显的残余肿瘤。	Within 24 hours of the procedure, a CT scan should be obtained to evaluate for hemorrhage, ventricular size, asymptomatic ischemia or edema and any obvious residual lesion.
患者应该在术后三天开始活动，并拔出脑室内引流管。	The patient should be mobilized by day three and the intraventricular catheter removed.
脑室导管应该尽可能快地拔除，预防感染和脑室炎。	The catheter should be removed as soon as possible to prevent infection and ventriculitis.
患者头部抬高20-30渡，并将颅内压力保持在10-15mmHg之间。	Intracranial pressure should be kept between 10 and 15 mmHg with the patients’ head elevated at 20 to 30 degrees.
最佳的做法是谨慎地引流少量脑脊液，这有利于清除术后残渣并维持合适的压力来预防硬膜下积液。	Judicious CSF drainage of small amounts is best to remove debris, maintain appropriate pressures and prevent subdural fluid accumulation.
一些患者需要永久性的脑脊液分流手术来治疗术后脑积水。	Some patients may require permanent CSF diversion for postoperative hydrocephalus.
永久分流能改善这些患者的语言功能、运动功能和认知能力。	Permanent shunting may improve speech, motor function, and cognitive abilities in these patients.
此外，如果脑室梗阻没有在术中解除，分流手术可能是必须的。	Further, if ventricular obstruction was not cleared intraoperatively, a shunt may be necessary.
术后功能障碍取决于手术入路和病变的大小、定位、切除程度，最重要的因素是对脑室壁及邻近正常结构的操作。	Postoperative deficits vary depending on the approach, size, location, extent of resection and most importantly manipulation of ventricular walls and adjacent normal structures.
视野缺失是最常见的功能障碍之一，几乎在20-64%的病例中都有发生。	Visual field loss is one of the most common deficits, occurring in 20-64% of cases.
已有报道认知障碍和偏瘫在8-30%的患者中发生，这一功能障碍通常发生在术后早期阶段，并且大多数患者随时间进展会有显著改善。	Cognitive dysfunction and hemiparesis have been reported in 8-30% of patients and frequently occur early in the postoperative period but significantly improve overtime in the majority of patients.
语言功能障碍也有可能发生，特别是病变位于主侧半球脑室内时多见。	There are also possibilities of speech disturbances, particularly with mass lesions of the dominant ventricle.
无论采用何种入路切除肿瘤，术后癫痫发生均常见。	Postoperative seizures are common with resection regardless of the procedure.
癫痫发生率在29-70%之间，特别是经皮质入路多见。	Incidence of seizures ranges from 29% to 70%, especially for transcortical routes.
大多数表现为脑积水的患者，尽管全切除肿瘤，仍有高达33%的患者需要永久性分流手术。	Most patients present with hydrocephalus, and despite gross total resection of their tumors, up to 33% require permanent shunting.
颅底手术的经验和教训	Lessons Learned
图1:	Walter Dandy展示他逐步切除听神经瘤的步骤：1）通过开放脑室降低颅内压；2）打开硬脑膜后进一步释放小脑延髓池脑脊液；3）最后通过切除小脑半球外侧以显露肿瘤 (Dandy	WE.	The	Brain.	Hagerstown,	MD:	WF	Prior Company, 1966)。	Figure 1: Walter Dandy demonstrated his stepwise technique for resection of acoustic neuromas: 1) relief of intracranial tension through the use of ventriculostomy, 2) further cerebrospinal fluid drainage through the cisterna magna upon dural opening, and 3) final exposure of the tumor via resection of the lateral cerebellum (Dandy WE. The Brain. Hagerstown, MD: WF Prior Company, 1966).
颅底手术是一项技术要求极高的工作，这需要术者对细节有严格的把握。	Surgery of the cranial base is a technically demanding task that requires strict attention to detail.
在铸就一名颅底外科医生的过程中，手术经验发挥了重要作用。	Operative experience plays an important role in maturation of a skull base surgeon.
在本章中，笔者将总结近10年来的个人手术经验和教训。	I have summarized my personal lessons over a decade of practice in this chapter.
颅底外科开颅术和脑组织牵引	Skull Base Osteotomy and Brain Mobilization
扩大骨窗往往需要切开较大的软组织皮瓣。	Extensive bony removal often requires large soft tissue scalp flaps.
术者心中需规划好切口设计，以保护皮瓣的血供和血管蒂，避免造成组织缺血和术后切口愈合不良。	Incisions should be planned with conservation of the blood supply and vascular pedicle in mind to avoid tissue ischemia and postoperative wound breakdown.
在术前制定最终手术计划时，患者既往手术切口、未来可能存在的切口以及既往放疗史都需要考虑在内。	Previous incisions, the potential need for any future incisions, and the patient’s history of radiation therapy should be considered during the final preoperative planning.
颅底重建和关颅方式应在术前考虑周全，在显露骨窗过程中准备好带蒂皮瓣和骨膜。	Reconstruction and closure should be planned at the outset so that vascularized tissue flaps or pericranium can be prepared during the exposure.
骨窗的显露应满足双手在显微镜下或者内镜下进行手术操作，以最小化或者避免对脑组织过度牵拉。	The exposure should also be appropriately large enough to accommodate bimanual dissection under full microscope or endoscopic visualization to minimize or obviate the need for brain retraction.
将肌皮瓣（包括颞肌和枕肌）翻起并从手术者工作视野中牵开。	The reflected myocutaneous flaps (involving the temporalis and suboccipital muscles) should be mobilized away from the working angles of the operator.
通过腰大池置管、脑室穿刺或者打开基底池可以缓慢的引流脑脊液，减少对脑组织的牵拉。	Generous CSF drainage via a lumbar puncture/drain, ventricular puncture/drain, or opening of the basal cisterns reduces the need for cerebral retraction.
在进行颅底手术时，笔者常常选择术前腰大池置管以释放脑脊液。特别是当脑池已被肿瘤占据或者手术早期无法到达脑池的情况下（比如经岩骨前入路或中颅窝入路），这种方式的优点更加明显。	I liberally use lumbar CSF drainage during my skull base cases and strongly believe in its value as the cisterns may be filled with tumor or not accessible during the early parts of dissection and brain mobilization (for example during anterior transpetrosal or middle fossa trajectories).
即使在肿瘤体积较大并出现中线移位时，打开硬膜后笔者也从未发现因腰大池置管缓慢引流脑脊液出现的不良影响。	Even in cases that involve large tumors and midline shift, I have not observed any harmful effect when CSF is drained gradually through the lumbar drain upon opening the dura.
笔者的经验是每次释放10ml脑脊液，总量最多可达80到100ml。	I request up to a total of 80-100cc of CSF drainage in 10cc aliquots.
患者采取合适的体位以充分利用重力作用减轻脑组织的牵拉，术中需精确而适当的进行骨质切除，避免不加选择的过度骨质切除，充分解剖蛛网膜并释放脑脊液，有策略的使用手持吸引器行动态牵开脑组织则可以避免使用固定牵开器。	Appropriate patient positioning to exploit gravity retraction, precise and applicable bone resection without attempting indiscriminate and overzealous osteotomies, generous dissection of the arachnoid membranes and CSF drainage, and strategic use of the hand held suction device as a dynamic retractor will avoid the need for fixed retractors.
如果吸引器的长轴移动方向与脑组织需要牵开的方向不一致时，双手操作就会比较牵强。	If the axis of suction and vector of retraction are not aligned, bimanual dissection may be compromised.
这种情况通常出现在经颞下硬膜外入路和中颅窝入路的手术中，固定的牵开器应该是“支撑（hold）”脑组织而不是牵拉脑脑组织。	This situation frequently occurs during extradural subtemporal and middle fossa approaches; fixed retractor blades may be used as brain “holders” rather than retractors.
在很少情况下，可以通过切除小范围非功能区脑组织，来减少对脑的牵拉。	In rare cases, very small areas of noneloquent brain may be resected to reduce the need for retraction.
适当的神经麻醉及使用渗透性药物和利尿剂能够保证脑组织松弛。	Appropriate neuroanesthesia as well as administration of osmotic agents and diuretics also contribute to brain relaxation.
术前术者应该和麻醉医师充分沟通手术细节，以保证术中达到预期的麻醉效果。	The details of each operation should be discussed preoperatively with the anesthesiologist so expectations are met.
必要情况下应使用术中监测。	Intraoperative monitoring should be used when necessary.
重要的争议点	Important Controversies
骨质的切除程度一直是持续争论的话题。	The extent of an osteotomy remains a matter of ongoing debate.
比如说，颅底外科医生支持在大部分鞍旁手术中行眶颧骨质切除，而非颅底专业的神经外科医生则很少使用此入路，并对经典或者扩大翼点入路暴露的范围很满意。	For example, skull base surgeons are proponents of orbitozygomatic osteotomies for the majority of parasellar lesions, whereas non-skull base surgeons use this approach sparingly and are satisfied with the exposure afforded through a standard or expanded pterional craniotomy.
骨质切除不应根据术者的经验而改变，而应当从病变的位置、质地以及如何获得宽阔的操作通道出发进行权衡。	The bony approach should not be tailored according to the experience of the surgeon, but instead based on the need for a broadened working corridor considering the location and consistency of the lesion.
颅底骨质切除还应取决于每一位患者手术局部的血管形态/解剖。	The need for a skull base osteotomy also depends on the regional cerebrovascular morphology/anatomy of the individual patient.
岩斜区的表皮样囊肿和同样体积的纤维型脑膜瘤需要的暴露范围是不一样的。	Petroclival epidermoid cysts and fibrous meningiomas of the same size require different extents of exposure.
在笔者的颅底肿瘤经验中，约20%的病例会采取扩大颅底显露(眶颧切除，经岩骨和经髁)。	Generally, I use extended skull base exposures (orbitozygomatic, petrosal and transcondylar osteotomies) during 20% of my skull base tumor cases.
这意味着对一个复杂的颅底肿瘤，选择扩大的颅底手术入路时需要足够令人信服的理由。	This means that I require a convincing reason to use a skull base approach for a complex skull base tumor.
比如说，完成经典的翼点开颅后进一步磨除眶顶和蝶骨嵴骨质。	For example, I complete a standard pterional craniotomy and then aggressively drill the roof of the orbit and the lateral sphenoid ridge.
这种扩大翼点开颅既吸取了眶额或眶颧入路的长处，又避免增加不必要的手术时间和患者面容改变的风险。	This alternative type of extended pterional osteotomy provides some of the advantages of a modified fronto-orbital or orbitozygomatic osteotomy without unnecessarily extending operative time or increasing the risk of cosmetic deformity.
同样地，对于后颅窝手术，笔者会将乙状窦、横窦表面的骨质磨除，然后轻轻地用缝线牵开这些组织，以便在乙状窦后入路或旁正中小脑上入路的手术中扩大手术操作空间。	Similarly, for posterior fossa operations, I drill the bone over the sigmoid and transverse sinuses and gently mobilize these structures using retraction sutures to expand the operative corridor through the retromastoid and paramedian supracerebellar routes.
切开小脑幕和硬脑膜内岩骨磨除使术者有机会避免大范围岩骨磨除。	The transection of the tentorium and intradural petrous bone drilling offer additional opportunities to avoid a radical petrosectomy.
使用有角度的显微手术器械和内镜同样也能够减少对岩骨的磨除和其他扩大的颅底显露需要。	The use of angled microsurgical instruments and angled endoscopes has also decreased the need for petrosectomies and other more radical skull base exposures.
硬膜内显微分离	Intradural Microdissection
分离和切除操作应该遵循显微手术的原则。	Dissection and resection maneuvers should strictly adhere to the principles of microsurgery.
这需要使用锐性而避免钝性分离方法。	They require the use of sharp and avoidance of blunt dissection methods.
钝性分离是对脆弱的组织进行拉扯或推挤以打开或者新建分离平面，可能造成缺血或牵拉损伤。	Blunt dissection involves pulling or pushing delicate tissues to open or create dissection planes, and can lead to ischemic and traction injuries.
所有显露的脑组织表面都需要覆盖棉片，防止操作中传递器械不慎引起的皮质损伤以及显微镜强烈的光线照射引起的干燥损伤。	All exposed brain surfaces should be covered by a piece of Telfa to avoid inadvertent cortical injury during the transfer of instruments and desiccation injury from the heat generated by the intense light of the microscope.
在肿瘤瘤内减压以前，如脑膜瘤之类的良性肿瘤应该在硬脑膜基底阻断血供，只有在这基础上才能够分块切除。	Before they are debulked, benign tumors such as meninigomas should be first devascularized at their dural base, and only then removed in a piecemeal fashion.
肿瘤的质地决定了大规模切除肿瘤前所需的分离范围（质地越硬，需分离的范围越大。译者注）。	The tumor’s consistency often affects the extent of the dissection required to facilitate aggressive tumor resection.
在重要的神经血管上留下小的薄片肿瘤能够明显降低患者术后的并发症。	Leaving a small fragment of fibrous tumor adherent to critical neurovascular structures dramatically reduces the risk of complications.
一味追求肿瘤全切，过度地、不慎重地肿瘤切除往往使术后的效果令术者和患者均感到失望。	Overaggressive, indiscreet, and overzealous resection to primarily achieve a tumor-free operative field will disappoint both the surgeon and the patient postoperatively.
笔者通常反对切除最后附着在面神经上残留的极小块听神经瘤：留下大约占整个肿瘤2%的小块残余肿瘤往往可以避免给患者造成难以接受的面瘫后果。	I often resist the strong temptation to remove the last, very small piece of adherent acoustic tumor attached to cranial nerve VII: leaving behind the remaining small piece, approximately 2% of the tumor, will avoid significant facial weakness that is unacceptable to patients.
放射外科已经能够长期控制残留的少量肿瘤。	Radiosurgery has proven that long-term tumor control for small remnants is readily possible.
肿瘤会使正常的解剖结构发生移位，常将颅神经推移和撑开，肿瘤表面也会有血管分支或穿支经过。	Tumors distort the normal anatomy, often displacing and splaying the cranial nerves, branching/perforating arteries over their capsule.
笔者通常首先识别正常的解剖结构，然后平行于重要解剖结构的方向来对异常/变形的解剖结构进行操作，从而减少损伤重要解剖结构的风险。	I routinely identify the normal anatomy and work toward the abnormal/distorted anatomy in a direction parallel to the critical structures to reduce the risk of injury.
单极刺激探针能够帮助识别追踪颅神经。	A monopolar stimulating probe assists in identifying and tracking the cranial nerves.
保护蛛网膜和软脑膜界面对于维持神经血供和减少损伤穿支血管至关重要。	It is critical to respect the arachnoid and pial planes in order to maintain the nerves’ blood supply and reduce the risk of injuring the perforating vessels.
保护穿支血管和静脉在内的所有血管，对保护功能来说都非常重要。	Preserving vasculature, including perforators and veins, is essential for maintaining function.
为了进一步保护功能，笔者采取持续液体冲洗来清理手术区，这样可以避免使用吸引器过近接触脆弱的颅神经、穿支血管和静脉 。	To further protect function, I use continuous fluid irrigation to clear the operative field so that I can avoid the need for the suction device to be placed in close contact with the delicate cranial nerves, perforating vessels, and veins.
在颅底狭小的操作空间里，使用超声吸引器在肿瘤包膜内充分的进行瘤内减压是十分重要的。	Within the small working space at the skull base, it is important to aggressively debulk the tumor using an ultrasonic aspirator while respecting the tumor capsule.
对肿瘤进行瘤内减压可以使肿瘤囊壁容易移动，扩大解剖蛛网膜的操作空间。	Intracapsular tumor decompression allows flexible tumor capsule mobilization and expanded working angles for microdissection through the arachnoid membranes.
这条重要的原则能够避免对整块肿瘤过分的用力牵拉，还可以避免术中对肿瘤包膜的边角进行非直视下分离，导致颅神经和血管的损伤。	This important principle prevents inadvertent forceful pulling and pushing on the bulky tumor, which often leads to cranial nerve and vascular injuries. It also enables the surgeon to avoid blind dissection around the corners of the capsule.
如果颅神经与肿瘤包膜粘附紧密，笔者会使用精细的镊子轻轻的夹住并剥离包围在神经周围的蛛网膜，使神经从肿瘤上分开，而不是直接的对神经进行操作。	If the cranial nerve is very adherent to the tumor capsule, I use very fine forceps to gently grab and peel the encasing arachnoid membrane of the nerve along with the nerve away from the capsule without directly manipulating the cranial nerve.
应当避免或尽可能的减少对神经组织和颅神经的直接操作。	Manipulation of the neural tissue and cranial nerves should be avoided or minimized as much as possible.
为保证所有的步骤都成功，外科医生需要有足够的耐心和保持镇静，尤其是在手术的最后阶段，这时候大部分关键的分离操作都已完成。	For the overall procedure to be successful, the surgeon must exhibit patience and maintain his or her composure, especially during the last hours of the operation when the most critical dissection is conducted.
技术上的效率对于取得这种胜利至关重要，因为效率低的操作会导致术者的疲劳和让患者失望的手术效果。	Technical efficiency is essential for this success as inefficient operative maneuvers lead to operator’s fatigue and disappointing outcomes for the patient.
疲劳会影响术者的判断，是被低估的造成术者失误的原因之一。	Fatigue does affect surgical judgment, and it is one of the under-recognized leading causes of operators’ errors.
这也是笔者非常审慎地使用耗时的扩大颅底骨质磨除原因之一。	This is one of the reasons why I use time-consuming extensive skull base osteotomies judiciously.
手术早期、非关键步骤应该高效的完成，只有这样，术者才有足够的时间和精力来保护颅神经和穿通血管。	The early, less critical parts of the operation should be conducted efficiently so that, in turn, I have the capacity to focus my utmost attention on preserving the cranial nerves and perforators.
那些操作时间超过12小时的手术必须分期进行。	Operations lasting more than 12 hours must be staged.
第一次手术为获取治愈（完全手术切除）提供了最佳的机会，因此为了达到这个目的应该不遗余力。	The first operation offers the best chance for achieving a cure (gross total resection), so every attempt should be made to achieve this goal.
患者的健康是至关重要的目标，而非术者的个人信条（也就是那些在住院医师及专科医师培训期间学习并形成的观念）或者日程安排。	The patient’s well-being is the utmost goal, not the surgeon’s dogma (that is, what was learned during residency and fellowship) or his/her agenda.
这一原则可能在术者紧张操作过程中被潜意识或者不情愿地忽略。	This doctrine may be subconsciously or unwillingly ignored during the intense moments of the operation.
手术者的效率	Surgeon’s Efficiency
当进行颅底手术的时候，术者采取坐姿和使用扶手会感到非常舒适。	When performing skull base surgery, I feel most comfortable operating while seated and using an armrest.
术者保持自己舒适可以避免疲劳，并且能够保证手术关键部分显微分离的顺利进行。	The surgeon’s own comfort can prevent fatigue and allows for smooth microsurgical dissection maneuvers during the critical portions of the surgery.
这些关键的操作往往是在已经出现疲劳的手术后期阶段。	These critical maneuvers are often required later in the operation when fatigue has set in.
笔者会使用显微镜的口控装置以尽可能的减少那些频繁、多余和欠深思熟虑的移动，从而可以不间断地使用双手进行分离操作。	I use a mouthpiece to minimize the frequent, redundant and nondeliberate movements and to continue bimanual dissection uninterrupted.
例如，口控可以让笔者避免操作显微镜手臂调焦按钮时反复的传递器械，对保证笔者显微操作效率发挥了无可替代的作用，但是使用口控同样存在学习曲线。	For example, the mouthpiece allows me to avoid repeatedly handing over instruments in order to refocus the microscope using the microscope’s handles. The mouthpiece is absolutely indispensible for me to achieve microsurgical efficiency, but there is a learning curve involved in using it.
用来显示显微镜或者内镜的手术操作的显示器应该对手术室内其他同事可见。	Monitors showing the operative view through the microscope or endoscope should be available to other members of the operating room team.
这些显示器能够让他们了解手术的进程，并且提示他们下一步需要使用什么手术器械。	These monitors allow them to follow the flow of surgery and alert them as to which dissecting instruments will be needed for the next step.
想了解详细的信息，请参考《手术者的哲学和操作姿势》这一章节。	For further details, please refer to the chapter on Surgeon’s philosophy and Operating Position.
图2.坐姿并使用托手架进行操作，同时使用显微镜口控（在图片的右下角的插图中挨着术者的口罩）能够极大的提高笔者操作的效率。	Figure 2: Operating in the seated position using an armrest while using the mouthpiece (visible next to the surgical mask in the right lower inset image) significantly advances my operative efficiency.
助手位于器械盘对面以传递器械。	The surgical assistant stands across the table to transfer instruments.
重建和关颅	Reconstruction and Closure
术后出现脑脊液漏往往会毁掉一台具有挑战性的手术成功完成后的喜悦。	The appearance of a postoperative CSF fistula easily spoils the joy of a great result after a challenging operation.
如果可能的话，在切除肿瘤后以“不透水”的方式缝合硬脑膜是非常令人满意的。	When possible, a watertight dural closure is highly desirable after resection of a skull base tumor.
自体骨膜和筋膜的使用要优于人工硬脑膜。	The use of pericranium or fascia lata is preferred over dural allografts.
在开颅过程留取带蒂骨膜是颅底重建的理想材料。	Vascularized pericranium, harvested during exposure, is the ideal material.
如果颅内和鼻腔或口咽部出现沟通，则需要带血管蒂的筋膜瓣进行修补。	Generous communications between the intracranial space and the nasal passages or oropharynx require a vascularized flap for closure.
大多数情况下，当鼻腔通道或者口咽和颅内的直接沟通不明显时，可以用自体脂肪进一步封闭因原硬脑膜无法缝合而造成的硬膜缺损（比如涉及到经岩骨前方和后方入路的硬膜下手术）。	For most cases when a direct communication between the nasal passages or oropharynx and the intracranial space is not evident, strips of fat may be used to further occlude the dural defect when primary dural closure is not feasible (that is, for intradural operations involving anterior and posterior petrosectomies).
如果术中额窦开放，应将额窦内粘膜剥离，然后将额窦缺损处使用颞肌填塞。	If the frontal sinus is entered, the mucosa should be curetted away and the frontal ostia occluded using temporalis muscle pledgets.
笔者有时也会使用带蒂骨膜覆盖暴露的额窦，也可以使用混有杆菌肽的骨蜡填塞额窦的缺损。	I may also use a piece of vascularized pericranium to cover the exposed sinus. Alternatively, bone wax mixed with bacitracin powder may be used to fill the sinus.
再次手术时如果涉及放疗后组织，会出现独特的挑战和并发症，这种情况下往往需要整形外科同事参与手术。	Reoperations involving radiated tissues present unique challenges and complications that require participation of our plastic surgery colleagues for their expert input.
术后护理	Postoperative Care
手术后行CT检查能够排除严重的颅内积气、血肿或其他并发症（如无症状的脑肿胀和缺血），并指导将患者转到常规病房的时机。	A postoperative computed tomography (CT) scan can exclude the presence of significant pneumocephalus, hematoma, or other complications such as asymptomatic brain swelling and ischemia. This imaging modality will guide the timing for transfer of the patient to the regular floor.
当累积大量的颅内积气但没有明显的脑脊液漏时，往往警示术者停止腰大池释放脑脊液，并寻找隐蔽的脑脊液漏口，若发现漏口需要再次行脑脊液漏修补术。	Accumulation of massive amount of pneumocephalus in the absence of obvious CSF leakage should alert the surgeon to discontinue lumbar CSF drainage and search for an occult CSF fistula that would require operative repair.
由于颅底手术后可能会出现迟发性脑积水，脑脊液漏如果对于暂时性的腰大池引流或者最终手术修补无效，则需要考虑脑室腹腔分流。	Because delayed hydrocephalus after skull base surgery is possible, CSF leakage, if unresponsive to temporary lumbar drainage or definitive operative repair, may demand placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for its repair.
· 颅底手术需要好的体力，有时候会让人筋疲力尽并且变化莫测。	Skull base surgery is physically demanding, and at times exhausting and treacherous.
术者一定要时刻保持果断、深思熟虑、内心平静的状态，包括在有压力的情况下。	The neurosurgeon must be decisive, deliberate, and serene at all times, including under pressure.
术者是船长，一位值得尊重的领导，他需要为手术室内的工作人员和团队内的其他人注入自信。	The surgeon is the “captain of the ship,” a respected leader who needs to instill confidence in the operating room staff and the rest of the team.
因此，在任何时候都不应出现有损人格或批评性的行为。	Thus, there is no excuse for demeaning or critical behavior anytime.
如果术者行为不当，那么其举止将破坏手术的成功并且威胁患者的安康。	If the surgeon acts inappropriately, his/her demeanor undermines the operative success and compromises the patient’s welfare.
· 在显微外科实验室花时间学习复杂的颅底解剖时没有捷径。	There is no short-cut when it comes to spending time in the microsurgical laboratory to learn about complex skull base anatomy.
· 年轻医师跟着有经验的老师学习并获得显微外科所必须的微妙技术是很有必要的。	It is essential that young surgeons work with experienced mentors to learn and develop the subtleties of technique necessary for successful microsurgery.
· 术者需要精通开颅和内镜技术，并且能够根据不同的患者优化手术入路，而不是根据术者之前所受的训练，兴趣或者舒适程度。	The surgeon needs to be an expert in both transcranial and endoscopic techniques, and the approach should be tailored to the individual patient, not dictated by the surgeon’s training, interest, or comfort level.
· 手术准备包括全面的掌握术前的影像资料，包括研究血管。	Operative preparation entails comprehensive interpretation of preoperative images, including vascular studies.
静脉往往没有得到应有的重视；静脉性梗塞对于患者往往是致死性的。	The veins often do not get the attention they deserve; a venous infarction would be devastating to the patient.
· 如果有疑问，磨除更多的颅骨来避免对脑组织的牵拉。	When in doubt, remove more bone and avoid brain retraction.
然而，应该避免教条的、轻率性的大范围颅底骨质磨除。	However, dogmatic and imprudent use of skull base osteotomies should be avoided.
· 应该尽可能的避免使用固定牵开器。	Fixed retractors should be avoided at all cost.
使用以下方法可以最大程度的减少固定牵开器的使用：	Minimize the use of fixed retractors by embracing these maneuvers:
· 通过腰大池释放脑脊液。	Placement of a lumbar drain
· 患者摆体位时充分利用脑的重力自然牵开。	Patient positioning to exploit gravity retraction
· 恰当地使用颅底骨质磨除术，并辅以创新性的手术路径，目的就是尽可能减少对脑组织的牵拉和破坏。	Judicious use of skull base osteotomies supplemented by innovative operative corridors aimed at minimizing brain retraction and transgression
· 尽可能解剖蛛网膜。	Generous opening of arachnoid membranes
· 动态地移动手持吸引器来更充分的暴露目标。	Dynamic movement of the handheld suction device to allow exposure of the target.
该技术需要双手较高的灵活性。	This technique requires advanced bimanual dexterity.
· 更充分的了解病变的三维解剖并将术前影像数据通过使用颅底标志导入手术区域，能够让术者在有限的操作空间内切除病变。	An advanced understanding of the three-dimensional anatomy of the lesion and the transference of the preoperative imaging data onto the operative field using skull base landmarks will allow the surgeon to remove the lesion safely through limited working spaces.
灵活的工作角度比较大的操作空间更为重要。	Flexible working angles are more important than generous working spaces.
· 锐性分离在解剖过程中是唯一的方式。	Sharp dissection is the only choice for dissection.
粗暴的钝性分离会造成缺血和牵拉性损伤。	Aggressive blunt dissection leads to ischemic and traction injuries.
· 包括脑膜瘤在内的颅内肿瘤应该首先切断血供，瘤内减压，然后切除。	Tumors, including meningiomas, should be first devascularized, debulked, and then dissected.
这个步骤是成功的关键。	This sequence is the recipe for success.
· 使用精致的镊子，笔者用颅神经周围包裹的蛛网膜作为把手将神经从粘附的肿瘤上轻轻地剥离下来。	Working with fine forceps, I use the encasing arachnoid membranes of the cranial nerves as a handle to peel the nerve gently away from the mobilized tumor capsule.
这样可以避免对神经进行直接操作。	This maneuver prevents direct manipulation of the nerve.
· 手术开始阶段并不太重要的操作应该高效地完成，以便术者可以在不疲惫的状态下进行后期至关重要的脑血管显微分离。	The initial, less critical portions of the operation should be performed efficiently so the surgeon can approach the later and most critical stages of cerebrovascular microdissection without fatigue.
脑室内肿瘤	Ventricular Tumors
该章节着重讨论脑室内常见病灶的重要诊断、临床特点，以及术中、术后处理原则。	This chapter includes a discussion of important diagnostic, clinical, intraoperative, and postoperative tenets for the most common lesions within the ventricular cavities.
按照发病顺序将这些病变列举在表1中。	These lesions are listed in their relative order of incidence in Table 1.
请参照“脑室内手术原则”一章的表1，了解这些肿瘤的影像学特点。	Please also refer to Table 1 of the Principles of Intraventricular Surgery chapter for relevant radiologic features of these tumors.
表1：重要的脑室内肿瘤（按照发病率由高到低排列，高级别胶质瘤则单独讨论）	Table 1: Important Ventricular Tumors Important ventricular tumors in descending order of incidence (high-grade gliomas are collectively discussed)
胶样囊肿占颅内病变的0.5%-1%。	Colloid cysts represent 0.5% to 1% of intracranial lesions.
这些囊肿主要起源于蒙氏孔处的三脑室顶，特征性的含有粘稠的胶状内容物。	These cysts predominantly originate from the roof of the third ventricle at the foramen of Monro and uniquely contain a viscous gelatinous material.
囊肿可达到较大的体积，并伴有囊内出血。	The cysts can reach a substantial size and be hemorrhagic (intracystic hemorrhage).
少见的情况下，可突然导致蒙氏孔堵塞，继发危及生命的急性脑积水。	They also can exceedingly rarely precipitate sudden occlusion of the foramen of Monroe and resultant life-threatening acute hydrocephalus.
蒙氏孔突然堵塞的机制可能与急性囊内出血、腰穿后肿瘤组织移位或分流管功能障碍有关。	The method of sudden obstruction of the foramen of Monro can be related to acute intracystic hemorrhage, postlumbar puncture transposition of the tumor mass, or shunt malfunction.
影像学上，胶样囊肿需和三脑室囊性肿瘤、后循环动脉瘤、脑囊虫病、椎基底动脉延长扩张等进行鉴别。	Radiographic differential diagnosis for a colloid cyst includes third ventricular cystic tumors, posterior circulation aneurysms, neurocysticercosis, and vertebrobasilar dolichoectasia.
虽然胶样囊肿一般不会在短期内体积显著增加，但囊内出血并不少见。	These lesions do not generally increase significantly in size overtime; however, intracystic hemorrhage is not rare.
胶样囊肿的处理依赖于患者的临床表现和囊肿的大小。	Management of a colloid cyst is dependent upon the patient’s clinical state and the cyst’s size.
无症状病变可以常规定期影像学复查进行随访。	Asymptomatic lesions can be managed conservatively with periodic radiographic evaluation.
与较大的囊肿不同，小病灶（10mm）产生临床症状的风险较低。	Unlike larger cysts, small cysts (10 mm) have a low risk of becoming symptomatic.
如果继发症状性脑积水，则需要内镜或显微镜下手术切除病灶。	If the patient’s hydrocephalus is symptomatic, there is an indication for surgical resection, either via endoscopic or microsurgical techniques.
胶样囊肿的切除，可以参考经胼胝体和经皮层入路章节。	Please see the chapters on Transcallosal and transcortical resection of colloid cysts.
图1：胶样囊肿一般无明显强化，T1相表现为等信号。	Figure 1:  Colloid cysts do not usually enhance but demonstrate T1 isointensity.
T2加权图像上，则表现为较白质更强的信号影，外周一圈低信号环。	On T2 weighted images, they show hyperintensity compared to the white matter with a circumferential rim of hypointensity.
颅咽管瘤占颅内肿瘤的1.2%到4.6%，一般认为病灶呈缓慢生长的过程，但由于其所处的位置特殊，以及包绕周围神经血管的特性，导致肿瘤容易复发，表现出侵袭性的临床过程。	Craniopharyngiomas represent 1.2% to 4.6% of intracranial tumors and are generally regarded as benign slow-growing lesions but their location and propensity to encase neurovascular structures leads them to recur and demonstrate a more aggressive clinical course.
该病存在两个疾病高发期，好发于在5-10岁和45-60岁的患者中。	These tumors have a bimodal peak incidence in patients who are either 5-10 or 45-60 years old.
在儿童中，颅咽管瘤属于最常见的颅内非神经上皮病灶。	In children, they are the most common type of non-neuroepithelial intracranial lesion.
该肿瘤起源于鞍旁外胚层来源的Rathke囊。	The origin of these tumors is from the ectodermally-derived Rathke’s pouch within the parasellar area.
颅咽管瘤的临床表现与其对视觉通路、垂体前叶产生的压迫效应，或者压迫脑室结构产生梗阻性脑积水有关。	The clinical presentation of a craniopharyngioma often derives from its mass effect on structures of the optic pathway, anterior pituitary, or ventricular structures, resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus.
显微切除手术是治疗这些病灶最主要的手段。	The treatment of choice for these lesions is microsurgical resection.
切除颅咽管瘤常用的手术入路包括内镜下经鼻蝶入路，扩大的翼点经侧裂入路，或较少使用的纵裂间经胼胝体入路。	The operative approach for these lesions involves the endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal, extended pterional transsylvian, or rarely interhemispheric transcallosal route.
除非进行根治性切除，否则会导致术后复发。	Unless a complete radical resection is performed, the craniopharyngioma can be expected to recur.
因此，对残留病灶，放射治疗是重要的辅助治疗手段。	Therefore, radiotherapy is an important part of the care of residual tumors.
图2：颅咽管瘤在MR图像上表现为不均匀的囊性和实质性信号（上图）。	Figure 2:  Craniopharyngiomas demonstrate heterogeneous cystic and solid features on MR imaging (upper images).
其囊性成分在T1相上表现为高信号，结节部分则表现为不均匀的显著强化（左下图）。	They show T1 hyperintensity within their cystic components and intense heterogeneous contrast enhancement of the nodule (left lower image).
CT上表现为点状钙化（右下图）。	CT scan (right lower image) demonstrates punctate calcification.
毛细胞星形胶质细胞瘤	Pilocytic Astrocytoma
毛细胞星形胶质细胞瘤是WHO I级、良性、慢性生长的一类肿瘤。	Pilocytic astrocytoma tumors are World Health Organization (WHO) grade I, benign, slow-growing, tumors.
这类肿瘤可能起源于中脑、丘脑或下丘脑，向第三脑室延伸。	These tumors may originate from the midbrain, thalamus, or hypothalamus, and expand into the third ventricle.
这类肿瘤常见于小脑，并向第四脑室延伸，但也可能起源于第四脑室顶，并逐步向外隐窝和桥臂蔓延。	They are most commonly within the cerebellum and extend into the fourth ventricle, but they may also originate along the fourth ventricular roof and spread progressively into the lateral recesses and the brachium pontis.
常常可见巨大的囊性成分。	A dominant cystic component is usually present.
对于四脑室的毛细胞星形胶质细胞瘤，其手术入路类似于室管膜瘤和髓母细胞瘤，膜帆入路是最佳选择。	The surgical approach to a pilocytic astrocytoma of the fourth ventricle resembles the approaches for ependymomas and medulloblastomas, optimally through the telovelar approach.
对于向上方延伸至顶盖水平，向上髓帆侵袭的巨大肿瘤，可联合膜帆入路和小脑上入路。	A combined telovelar and supracerebellar exposure may be necessary for large tumors extending superiorly to the level of the tectum with invasion of the superior medullary velum.
为暴露肿瘤上极，需要牵开蚓悬雍垂和结节。	Visualization of the superior margin of the tumor may require retraction of the vermal uvula and nodulus.
该区域可能就是肿瘤的起源部。	This region may be the site of tumor origin.
如果膜帆入路限制术者判断是否达到了手术全切，术者可以考虑采用小脑上入路。	If the telovelar approach limits verification of total resection, the surgeon may also consider using the supracerebellar approach.
先对肿瘤囊性成分进行引流减压，然后采用标准显微技术分离肿瘤结节。	The tumor’s cyst is first drained, and the tumor nodule is then dissected using standard microsurgical techniques.
目标是为了达到安全的次全切除。	Safe subtotal removal is the goal.
对于大部分该类型的残留肿瘤，复发进展的风险很低。	Most residual tumors of this type have a low risk of progression.
图3：图示为向四脑室延伸和压迫的蚓部毛细胞星形细胞胶质瘤。	Figure 3: A vermian pilocytic astrocytoma with extension and compression of the fourth ventricle is demonstrated.
肿瘤呈囊性，伴有明显强化的结节。	The tumor is cystic with an enhancing nodule.
囊壁未见强化，无需手术切除。	The wall is not enhancing and does not require removal.
松果体细胞瘤	Pineocytoma
这类起源于松果体实质的WHO I型病灶，位于松果体区，占颅内肿瘤的1%。	These WHO grade I lesions are responsible for 1% of intracranial tumors that originate from the pineal parenchyma and occupy the pineal region.
大部分为良性、非常缓慢生长的病灶，极少出现恶性进展。	They are generally benign, very slow-growing lesions and associated with exceedingly rare occurrence of malignant progression.
这类肿瘤的临床表现与肿瘤对顶盖产生的占位效应有关，导致Parinaud综合征，颅神经麻痹，内分泌异常，精神状况异常，或梗阻性脑积水。	The clinical presentation of these tumors results from their mass effect on the tectum causing Parinaud’s syndrome, cranial nerve palsies, endocrine abnormalities, altered mental status, or obstructive hydrocephalus.
显微或内镜下经小脑上入路开窗术是一个合理的选择。	Microsurgical or endoscopic fenestration via the supracerebellar corridor is a reasonable option.
图4：松果体细胞瘤在T2相上表现为高信号，伴有周围强化。	Figure 4: A pineocytoma demonstrates T2 hyperintensity and contrast enhancement at its periphery.
松果体细胞瘤一般生长缓慢，偶尔需要手术干预。	Pineocytomas typically grow slowly and occasionally require operative intervention.
海绵状血管瘤	Cavernous Malformations
关于海绵状血管瘤发病率的数据较少，大约0.1%-0.5%。	The incidence of these lesions is rare and approaches 0.1%-0.5%.
累及第四脑室者常原发于脑干。	When involving the 4th ventricle, they primarily arise from the brainstem.
脑室周海绵状血管瘤常为无症状性的，但由于其占位效应可导致梗阻性脑积水。	Paraventricular cavernous malformations are often asymptomatic, but can generate obstructive hydrocephalus because of their mass effect.
在脑室内发生出血转化时可能会导致急性症状，引起神经功能下降。	Acute presentation may occur with their hemorrhagic transformation within the ventricular system, precipitating neurologic decline.
采用髓帆入路暴露第四脑室海绵状血管瘤。	The exposure of the fourth ventricular cavernous malformations involves the telovelar approach.
可能需要对菱形窝进行电生理监测，以在沿着四脑室底切开前定位和暴露面丘。	Electrophysiologic mapping of the rhomboid fossa may be necessary for localizing and protecting the facial colliculus before an incision along the floor is made.
在识别安全进入区后，在脑室底切开一个小口，以促进血肿引流。	After the safe entry zones are identified, a small incision along the floor allows hematoma drainage.
在海绵状血管瘤内部进行电凝，有助于缩小病灶体积。	Coagulation of the internal caverns facilitates debulking of the lesion.
沿着病灶周围进行分离和分块切除。	The resection proceeds in a circumferential pattern with segmental removal of the malformation.
术者应在病灶全切的同时，小心谨慎地电凝供血动脉，以消除微小病灶，并达到止血的目的。	The surgeon should complete the resection with scrupulous coagulation of the feeding vessels to eliminate microfoci and facilitate hemostasis.
为获取更多的信息，请参照海绵状血管瘤相关章节，包括“海绵状血管瘤的评估”一章。	For more information, please refer to the chapters related to cavernous malformations including the one titled Evaluation of Cavernous Malformation.
髓母细胞瘤	Medulloblastoma
髓母细胞瘤是小儿四脑室肿瘤中最常见的类型。	These tumors account for the majority of fourth ventricular tumors in the pediatric population.
它可占据整个四脑室，对脑干和小脑产生占位效应。	Medulloblastomas can occupy the entire fourth ventricle, generating mass effect on the brainstem and cerebellum.
与室管膜瘤不同，这些病灶不会侵犯脑室底部，但是起源于上髓帆。	Unlike ependymomas, these lesions do not invade the ventricular floor, but instead originate from the superior medullary velum.
髓母细胞瘤会插入到桥臂和外隐窝。	Insertion points for medulloblastomas are at the brachium pontis and lateral recesses.
这类病灶最合适的手术入路为膜帆入路。	The optimal surgical approach for these lesions is the telovelar approach.
一开始应对菱形窝上部进行肿瘤减容，以暴露大脑导水管。	Initial debulking of the tumor mass should evacuate the superior rhomboid fossa to bring the cerebral aqueduct into view.
接着向下方切除。	The resection then continues inferiorly.
一定要避免对四脑室底的穿透性损伤。	It is imperative to avoid perforating the floor of the 4th ventricle.
往往可以看到髓母细胞瘤向外侧延伸。	Lateral extension of medulloblastomas is common.
图5：髓母细胞瘤在T1相上相对白质呈低信号，往往呈不均匀强化。	Figure 5: Medulloblastomas are hypointense to grey matter on T1 and often heterogeneously enhance.
在T2相上，由于钙化、坏死和囊性变的存在往往表现为混杂信号。	On T2 sequences, they also appear heterogeneous due to calcification, necrosis and cyst formation.
高级别胶质瘤	High-Grade Glioma
高级别胶质瘤（WHO III级和IV级）最常起源于胼胝体、丘脑或透明隔。	High-grade gliomas (WHO grades III and IV) are commonly derived from the corpus callosum, thalamus, or septum pellucidum.
这些病灶偏向于侧脑室前角的一侧生长。	These lesions demonstrate a partiality for the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle.
这类高度恶性病灶的临床表现与肿瘤向周围脑实质的压迫或浸润有关。	The clinical presentation of these highly malignant lesions results from compression or infiltration of the surrounding parenchyma.
鉴于总体预后不加，处理这些病变时，需结合多方面因素来制定治疗策略。	A decision on management for these lesions is multifaceted because of their overall poor prognosis.
需要关注患者的年龄、神经症状、神经精神功能和病灶本身的特点包括大小、浸润深度和部位。	Particular factors of interest include the patient’s age, neurologic status, neuropsychological function, and lesional characteristics such as size, depth of invasion, and location.
广泛累及穹隆往往导致较差的神经功能状态，与手术切除相比，活检术更加合适。	Extensive forniceal involvement is associated with poor neurologic status and the need for a biopsy rather than surgical resection.
图6：高级别胶质瘤具有不规则的边界和结节，呈不均匀的强化表现。	Figure 6: High-grade gliomas heterogeneously enhance with irregular borders and nodules.
在T2相上表现为高信号。	They also appear hyperintense on T2 sequences.
位于透明隔的肿瘤与神经细胞瘤相似。	Tumors of the septum pellucidum can mimic neurocytomas.
室管膜下瘤	Subependymoma
室管膜下瘤占颅内肿瘤的0.2%-0.7%，一般与脑室壁粘连，为一类生长缓慢的良性病灶。	Subependymomas account for 0.2%-0.7% of intracranial tumors and are generally considered benign, slow-growing lesions adherent to the ventricular wall.
这类肿瘤不会侵犯肿瘤周围的脑实质。	These tumors do not invade the peritumoral parenchyma.
最常见的发病部位是四脑室，然后是侧脑室。	The most common location for them is the fourth ventricle, followed by the lateral ventricle.
影像学上这类病灶需要与室管膜瘤、少突胶质细胞瘤和脉络丛乳头状瘤鉴别。	The radiologic differential diagnoses for this lesion include ependymomas, oligodendrogliomas, and choroid plexus papillomas.
根据病灶所处的位置和大小，室管膜下瘤的临床表现常包括梗阻性脑积水。	The clinical presentation of subependymomas often involves obstructive hydrocephalus, depending on the location and size of the lesion.
对偶然发现的侧脑室室管膜下瘤的处理存在争议。常规随访、复查影像学检查评估肿块的变化情况，是可行的处理方式。	The management of incidentally identified lateral ventricular subependymomas is controversial, and an acceptable approach is routine follow-up evaluation with imaging to identify the evolution of the mass.
对于无症状的室管膜下瘤，我个人并不推崇手术切除。	I do not pursue surgical resection in patients with asymptomatic subependymomas.
图7：室管膜下瘤并不会显著增强，在T2相上与邻近白质和灰质相比，表现为高信号。	Figure 7: Subependymomas do not enhance significantly and are hyperintense to adjacent white and grey matter on T2 weighted images.
而在T1相上，则表现为等或低信号。	On T1 images, they are iso- or hypointense.
上图中病灶位于四脑室底。	The lesion on the above images is located at the floor of the fourth ventricle.
纤维型星形细胞胶质瘤	Fibrillary Astrocytoma
该类肿瘤属于WHO I级星形胶质细胞瘤，当位于脑室内时，主要发生于侧脑室。	These tumors are WHO grade I astrocytomas that, when intraventricular, predominately occur in the lateral ventricle.
纤维型星形胶质细胞瘤表现为散在的浸润性生长方式，但是被认为低度恶性倾向、缓慢生长的良性病灶。	Fibrillary astrocyomas demonstrate a scattered infiltrative growth pattern, but are considered benign slow-growing lesions with low malignant potential.
肿瘤常来自侧脑室壁。	These tumors emerge from the ventricular wall.
这类病灶的临床表现一般包括梗阻性脑积水。	The clinical presentation of these lesions typically involves obstructive hydrocephalus.
肿瘤存在出血倾向，可导致脑室内出血。	They have a propensity to become hemorrhagic and can cause intraventricular hemorrhage.
与室管膜下瘤和中枢神经细胞瘤相似，对偶然发现的低级别胶质瘤的最佳处理方式仍然存在争议。	Similar to subependymomas and central neurocytomas, the most appropriate management of incidentally identified low-grade gliomas is debated.
对于偶然发现的小体积病灶，无症状的患者，可以采用影像学手段进行监控。	Asymptomatic patients with small incidentally identified lesions can undergo surveillance imaging.
脑膜瘤	Meningioma
脑膜瘤占脑室内肿瘤的1%-5%。	Meningiomas account for 1-5% of all ventricular tumors.
当它们发生于侧脑室时，起源于脉络丛和脉络膜基质。	When they arise from the lateral ventricle, their origin involves the stroma of the choroid plexus and tela choroidea.
常有钙化和囊性变。	They frequently harbor calcifications and cystic degeneration.
由于血供丰富，增加手术切除的难度。	Their high vascularity can offer an operative challenge, with most of their anterograde blood supply arising from the choroidal arteries and retrograde venous backflow joining the deep ventricular veins.
大部分的前向供血来源于脉络丛动脉，而回流静脉则汇入深部的脑室静脉。	Control over the feeding vessels early in surgery may be impossible.
因此，在手术的早期控制供血动脉几乎是不可能的，从而导致在分块切除肿瘤的过程中继发大量的出血。	This limitation may lead to excessive bleeding during piecemeal tumor removal.
因此需要在每一步都充分止血，在设计手术入路时，尽量在早期暴露肿瘤的血管蒂。	Stepwise hemostasis is necessary and operative planning should consider the need for exposure of the tumor’s vascular pedicle early in surgery.
这些病灶的临床表现常包括肿瘤占位效应引起的梗阻性脑积水，其处理方式包括根治性显微切除手术。	Clinical presentation of these lesions commonly involves obstructive hydrocephalus because of the tumor-derived mass effect. Management of these lesions includes radical microsurgical resection.
对于偶然发现的肿瘤，可以选择临床和影像学随访观察，如果肿瘤进展，则可考虑手术切除。	For tumors identified incidentally, routine clinical and radiographic analysis is an appropriate course, and progression is an indication for surgical resection.
图8：脑膜瘤表现为显著的均一强化，边界清楚，伴有脑膜尾征。	Figure 8: Meningiomas demonstrate intense homogenous enhancement with very well-demarcated borders and dural tails.
在T2相上典型地表现为高信号。	They are typically hyperintense on T2 weighted images.
侧脑室脑膜瘤最常见于房部。	The atrium is their most common intraventricular location.
中枢神经细胞瘤	Central Neurocytoma
中枢神经细胞瘤占颅内肿瘤的0.1-0.5%，属于WHO II级肿瘤。	Central neurocytomas account for 0.1-0.5% of intracranial tumors and are classified as WHO grade II lesions.
大部分病灶起源于透明隔，填充于侧脑室，肿瘤偏向生长于左侧额角。	Most of these lesions arise from the septum pellucidum, fill the lateral ventricles with a propensity for the left frontal horn.
尽管大部分肿瘤呈良性过程，发现肿瘤的恶性特征，并伴有术后残留复发进展，则提示预后不良。	Although primarily benign, the identification of malignant features with postresection remnant progression is an unfavorable prognostic sign.
如果发现恶性进展，则可考虑辅助治疗（化疗和放疗）。	If malignant progression is identified, there is a role for adjuvant therapies (chemotherapy and radiation);
文献报道这两种方式均可缩小肿瘤体积，但是能否改善预后仍不清楚。	both are associated with a reported reduction in tumor volume with undetermined prognostic efficacy.
这些肿瘤往往血供丰富，因此立体定向活检可能导致危及生命的脑室内出血。	These tumors are frequently highly vascular and their stereotactic biopsy may lead to life-threatening intraventricular hemorrhage.
在沿着周边进行分离时，应注意进行充分的止血。	Attention to immaculate hemostasis during their circumdissection is advised.
图9：中枢神经细胞瘤表现为不均匀强化，在T2加权影像上表现为等至高信号。	Figure 9: Neurocytomas demonstrate heterogeneous enhancement patterns and appear iso- to hyperintesne on T2 weighted images.
常起源于透明隔。	They originate from the septum pellucidum.
室管膜瘤	Ependymoma
室管膜瘤主要发现于儿童患者中，占颅内肿瘤的2-9%。	Ependymomas are predominantly identified in the pediatric population and account for 2-9% of intracranial tumors.
然而，在成年人中，室管膜瘤是四脑室内最常见的肿瘤，起源于脑室底部。	However, in adults, ependymomas are the most common fourth ventricular tumor originating from the ventricular floor.
肿瘤与脑室底部通过血管蒂相连，也是两者唯一相连的部位。	These tumors often possess a vascular pedicle at the floor of the ventricle as their only site of association with the parenchyma.
大部分室管膜瘤都是呈良性、缓慢生长的过程。	They are generally considered benign, slow-growing lesions.
切除四脑室室管膜瘤的过程是非常单调的。	Resection of fourth ventricular ependymomas is tedious.
先对肿瘤进行减压，直到脑室顶的下表面与肿瘤的顶端分离开。	The tumor is first debulked until its apex is separated from the inferior surface of the ventricular roof.
这样可以解除受到梗阻的脑脊液通路。	This maneuver will relieve obstructed cerebrospinal fluid pathways.
肿瘤的上半部分往往会造成脑室内的拥挤，但并未与菱形窝上部粘连 。	This superior section of the tumor often crowds the ventricle, but is not adherent to the superior rhomboid fossa.
接着，将肿瘤的下半部分与闩部的神经实质分离开，并予以切除。	Subsequently, the inferior aspect of the tumor can be divided from the neural parenchyma at the obex and resected.
使用该技术，可以逐步切除大的病灶，并最终将病灶与下菱形窝分离。	This technique facilitates gradual resection of large lesions and eventual isolation of the lesion to the inferior rhomboid fossa.
超声吸引有助于分块切除肿瘤。	Ultrasonic aspiration assists in resection of the tumor piecemeal.
在脑干背侧和肿瘤之间不存在明确的分界面，因此用超声刀可削除足够多的肿瘤，而仅仅在脑干表面保留一薄层肿瘤组织。	A well-defined plane does not separate the tumor from the dorsal brainstem; the ultrasonic aspirator shaves off enough tumor while a small sheet is left over the brainstem.
不建议过度切除侵袭生长的肿瘤组织。	Aggressive resection of the infiltrating tumor is not advised.
向外侧延伸至外侧隐窝或桥小脑角区的四脑室室管膜瘤，并非手术全切的禁忌。	Lateral extension of fourth ventricular ependymomas into the lateral recesses or cerebellopontine angle is not a contraindication to gross total resection.
可以抬起扁桃体，以暴露出移动肿瘤的空间。	Elevation of the tonsils allows exposure of these spaces for tumor mobilization.
手术切除可以改善预后，因此是室管膜瘤的首选治疗方案。	Surgical resection correlates with a favorable prognosis and is the treatment of choice for ependymomas.
如果病理学提示室管膜瘤具有恶性特征，则需要辅助放疗。	If histopathology of the ependymoma reveals malignant features, adjuvant radiotherapy is necessary.
图10：室管膜瘤在T1相上是等至低信号的。	Fig 10: Ependymomas are iso- to hypointense on T1 images.
而在T2相上则是高信号，并且有不均匀的强化表现。	They are T2 hyperintense and show heterogeneous enhancement patterns.
表皮样囊肿	Epidermoid Cyst
表皮样囊肿是少见的脑室内病灶。主要位于四脑室，可延伸至三脑室和外侧隐窝。	Epidermoid cysts are rare ventricular lesions; they occur mainly within the fourth ventricle and can extend into the third ventricle and lateral recesses.
由于分隔的存在，囊肿可表现为分叶状。	The cyst can be multiloculated because of its septations.
囊肿的外表面可能含有软脑膜血管。	The outer surface of the cyst may incorporate pial vessels.
轻柔的显微解剖技术，可将囊肿从脑干和小脑上锐性分离出来，并存留肿瘤包膜上的软脑膜血管。	Gentle microdissection is used to sharply divide the cyst from the brainstem and cerebellum while preserving the invested pial vessels on the tumor capsule.
接着，用超声刀或吸引器对四脑室内的囊肿进行分块减容。	Next, the cyst in the fourth ventricle can be debulked using an ultrasonic aspirator or a suction device.
致密的蛛网膜或分隔组织形成了囊肿内腔室的壁。	The dense arachnoid membranes/septations compose the walls of the loculations within the cyst.
这些分隔可以打开，但是如果与神经血管组织粘连紧密的话，应予以保留。	These septations can be released but should be left behind if adherent to neurovascular structures.
在切除肿瘤后，需用生理盐水对延髓周围区域和外侧隐窝进行冲洗，以清除残留的微小肿瘤病灶，这些病灶可能是今后复发的根源。	Following removal of the mass, perimedullary spaces and lateral recesses should be irrigated with saline solution to sweep away any residual microscopic tumor foci, which could serve as a source for recurrence.
图11：表皮样囊肿在T2加权相上与脑脊液呈等信号。	Figure 11: Epidermoid cysts are isointense to CSF on T2 weighted images.
弥散加权成像有助于鉴别蛛网膜囊肿，由于弥散受限和T2相上的透过性，表皮样囊肿在DWI上表现为高信号。	Diffusion weighted imaging is beneficial for their differentiation from arachnoid cysts based on their increased signal due to a combination of true restricted diffusion and T2 shine through.
血管网织母细胞瘤	Hemangioblastoma
这些病灶最常见于四脑室内，与室管膜瘤或髓母细胞瘤之间存在本质的差别。	These lesions most commonly present within the fourth ventricle and are distinctly different from ependymomas or medulloblastomas.
其实质部分高度血管化，主要由小脑后下动脉的远端分支、脑干和小脑的终末血管以及脉络膜血管供血。	Their solid counterparts can be highly vascularized, perfused principally by the distal branches of the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries, end arteries along the brainstem and cerebellum, and choroidal vessels.
血管网织母细胞瘤包含静脉结构。	Hemangioblastomas also involve venous vasculature.
由于动脉和静脉的交互参与，因此需要在术前进行血管造影检查，以便发现肿瘤内的主要血管结构，评估介入栓塞的可能性。	This level of arterial and venous involvement necessitates a preoperative angiogram for operative planning, identification of major vasculature encompassed within the tumor, and an opportunity for embolization.
与切除其他类型的病灶不同，手术切除血管网织细胞瘤时，不能进行分块切除减容。	The operative technique for removal of hemangioblastomas is unique in that these lesions cannot be debulked.
血管网织母细胞瘤的实质部分与AVM类似，由薄壁的蜂窝样组织构成，因此不适合用双极电凝烧灼。	The parenchyma of hemangioblastomas resembles those of AVMs made of thin-walled honeycomb channels that are not readily amenable to bipolar coagulation.
在切除前，最关键的步骤时识别和离断进入病灶的终末供血动脉，但需要保护过路的供血动脉主干。	Before removal, the key step involves identification and sacrifice of the terminal, and not en passage major arterial feeders, to the lesion.
在成功限制进入肿瘤的动脉血后，肿瘤体积会缩小，从而给出探查肿瘤包膜边界以及四脑室的手术空间。	Upon restriction of arterial blood flow to tumor segments, the tumor may decrease in size and facilitate exploration of its capsule, including the fourth ventricle.
可逐步分段将乏血供的病灶部分从周围的神经血管组织上游离出来，该步骤应围绕肿瘤周边反复进行。	The devascularized portions of the lesion may then be segmentally dissected away from the surrounding neurovascular tissues; this step is repeated in a circumferential pattern.
非常重要的一点，是需要保持主要引流静脉通畅，直到肿瘤从小脑和脑干上完全分离出来。	It is paramount to maintain patency of the major draining veins until the lesion is completely separated from the cerebellum and brainstem.
考虑到可能会有丰富的软脑膜供血，以保持病灶的灌注。	There can be significant pial supply, which can maintain perfusion to segments of the lesion.
因此，必须将病灶从脑干和小脑上完全游离出来，以保证切断所有的动脉供血。	Therefore, complete dissection of the lesion from the brainstem and cerebellum must be completed to ensure complete removal of the perfusing arterial supply.
此后，可以电凝主干引流静脉，以便切除肿瘤。	After this is achieved, the major draining veins can be coagulated to facilitate removal of the lesion.
可以参考“血管网织母细胞瘤”一章，获取更加详细的信息。	For more details, refer to the chapter on Hemangioblastoma.
松果体母细胞瘤	Pineoblastoma
这类少见肿瘤，病理分级归为WHO IV级，占据了近40%的松果体区原发肿瘤。	These infrequent tumors are ranked WHO grade IV, although they account for approximately 40% of primary pineal tumors.
主要发现于儿童人群中，发病不存在性别偏向。	They are identified primarily in the pediatric population and have no sex predilection.
文献中有VP分流术后继发肿瘤播散的报道。	An occurrence of ventriculoperitoneal shunt-mediated dissemination has been reported.
治疗方案包括显微手术切除或病理活检明确诊断后联合辅助治疗。	Options for therapy include microsurgical resection or diagnostic biopsy followed by adjuvant therapy.
建议在安全的情况下全切肿瘤。	Safe gross total resection is advised.
肿瘤可侵犯顶盖区，但往往能有效地解离出来。	The tumor can infiltrate the tectal region, but usually can be dissected effectively.
需要对整个神经轴进行影像学检查，以排查病灶转移的发生。	The entire neuroaxis should be imaged to rule out metastatic lesions.
图12：松果体母细胞瘤典型地表现为T2相等信号，注射造影剂后不均匀强化。	Figure 12: Pineoblastomas typically are T2 isointense and heterogeneously enhance upon administration of contrast.
脊索样胶质瘤	Chordoid Glioma
这类少见的胶质细胞肿瘤属于WHO II级，最常起源于三脑室。	These rare glial tumors are WHO grade II and most commonly originate within the third ventricle.
最佳的治疗方案是手术全切。	The treatment of choice is gross total resection.
如果无法达到手术全切，肿瘤可能会复发。	If complete resection is not achieved, the tumor will recur.
鉴于临床试验中发现各种辅助治疗的效果有限，故目前并未被推荐用于治疗脊索样胶质瘤。	Adjuvant therapies are not a proven option for the treatment of choroidal gliomas due to their poor efficacy in clinical trials.
这类肿瘤与三脑室底粘连，因此对该部位不推荐强行切除。	This tumor tends to adhere to the floor of the ventricle; aggressive resection at this site is not advised.
最常用的手术入路为经胼胝体扩大的经室间孔入路。	The most common approach to this type of tumor is a transcallosal expanded transforaminal route.
图13：如图所示为典型的脊索样胶质瘤。	Figure 13:  The imaging characteristics of a chordoid glioma are depicted.
脉络丛乳头状瘤	Choroid Plexus Papilloma
这类肿瘤占颅内肿瘤的0.5-0.6%，属于WHO I级，最常见于儿童人群。	These lesions account for 0.5-0.6% of intracranial tumors and are considered WHO grade I lesions. Choroid plexus papillomas are most often found in the pediatric population.
手术切除时治疗的首选方案。	Management should involve surgical resection as the treatment of choice.
脉络丛乳头状瘤血供丰富。	Choroid plexus papillomas are highly vascular.
手术要点包括早期处理近端的脉络丛供血动脉，以便能离断肿瘤血供。	Intraoperative pearls include early impediment of proximal choroidal feeding arteries, facilitating devascularization of the tumor mass.
之后可使用超声吸引进行瘤内减压。	Debulking with an ultrasonic aspirator follows this step.
在切除肿瘤后，应切除参与的看似未病变的脉络丛组织，以降低肿瘤复发的风险。	Following removal of the tumor mass, the remaining nonpathologic appearing choroid plexus should be resected to decrease the risk of recurrence.
图14：脉络丛乳头状瘤强化明显，边界及其不规则。	Figure 14:  Choroid plexus papillomas intensely enhance with administration of contrast and have very irregular borders.
在T2加权相上亦表现为高信号。	They are also hyperintense on T2 weighted images.
生殖细胞肿瘤	Germ Cell Tumor
这类肿瘤占颅内肿瘤的0.4-3.4%，以生殖细胞瘤为主，占65%。	These tumors represent 0.4-3.4% of intracranial tumors, with germinomas making up the majority (65%).
接下来的病理类型包括畸胎瘤（18=20%）和混合性的生殖细胞肿瘤（25%）。	Less common types include teratomas (18−20%) and mixed germ cell tumors (25%).
大部分肿瘤发现于儿童人群（10-21岁）。	Most cases are found in the pediatric population (10-21 years old).
在超过30岁的年龄段中非常少见。	Germ cell tumors are rare in patients older than 30 years.
松果体区和三脑室都是常见的原发部位。	The pineal region and third ventricle are primary sites of involvement.
因此，临床表现包括占位效应，继发梗阻性脑积水，颅神经麻痹，视路破坏，小脑功能失调，或内分泌异常。	Therefore, the clinical presentation results from mass effect, generating obstructive hydrocephalus, cranial nerve palsies, optic pathway disruption, cerebellar dysfunction, or endocrine abnormalities.
治疗方案包括显微手术切除，内镜下手术切除，诊断性活检和辅助治疗。	Options for therapy include microsurgical resection, endoscopic removal, diagnostic biopsy, and adjuvant therapy.
详细情况可参考“松果体区肿瘤”一章。	For more details, please refer to the chapter on Pineal Region Tumors.
推荐通过脑脊液化验和内镜下活来评估肿瘤的性质。	Preoperative characterization of these tumors through cerebrospinal fluid studies and endoscopic biopsy is recommended.
室管膜下巨细胞瘤（SEGA）	Subependymal Giant Cell Astrocytoma (SEGA)
SEGAs起源自侧脑室壁，是WHO I级的肿瘤。	The SEGAs are WHO grade I lesions that originate from the lateral ventricular wall.
这类肿瘤特别偏向于结节性硬化的患者，而且它们的存在会提示患者预后不良。	They demonstrate a special predilection for patients suffering from tuberous sclerosis and their presence is a poor prognostic sign.
相反，在普通人群中，SEGA则是一类生长缓慢的良性病灶，具有很低的恶性倾向。	In contrast, in the general population, they are considered benign slow-growing lesions with a low malignant potential.
SEGAs的临床表现包括梗阻性脑积水或脑室内出血。	The clinical presentation of SEGAs typically involves obstructive hydrocephalus or intraventricular hemorrhage.
与其他低级别胶质瘤类似，对于偶然发现的SEGA的最佳治疗策略还存在争议。	Similar to other low-grade gliomas, the best strategy for an incidentally identified SEGA is debated.
对于无症状、小的偶发病灶，影像学随访是最合理的治疗手段。	In asymptomatic patients with small incidental lesions, follow-up radiographic imaging is most reasonable.
图15：多发的室管膜下结节，考虑SEGA，偏向于占据蒙氏孔周围区域。	Figure 15: Multiple subependymal nodules of SEGA are present. They have a special predilection for the region of the foramen of Monro.
额下经终板入路开颅术	Subfrontal Translamina Terminalis Approach
总体原则和入路指征	General Considerations and Indications for the Approach
终板由薄层灰质、软脑膜和室管膜构成，其上界为前联合、外侧为大脑半球，下方为视交叉上部。	The lamina terminalis is a thin membrane composed of gray matter, pia mater, and ependyma bordered superiorly by the anterior commissure, laterally by the cerebral hemispheres and inferiorly by the superior aspect of the optic chiasm.
在胚胎时期，这层薄膜标志着发育中的神经管的最前端。	Embryologically, this lamina represents the most rostral end of the developing neural tube.
采用额下经终板入路，可以经三脑室前壁处理三脑室前部的病变。	The subfrontal translamina terminalis approach uses the anterior wall of the third ventricle (lamina terminalis) to reach anterior lesions in this chamber.
笔者很少用此入路，只是在处理实性颅咽管瘤和下丘脑错构瘤时用到。	I use this approach rarely, mainly for large predominately solid craniopharyngiomas and hypothalamic hamartomas.
经鼻-鞍结节入路则能比较理想的显露囊性颅咽管瘤。	Cystic craniopharyngiomas are ideally exposed via the transnasal transtuberculum route.
额下入路处理三脑室实性颅咽管瘤需要改良眶颧开颅，获得由下至上的额下手术角度，便于处理肿瘤的上极，而不过度牵拉额底。	The subfrontal approach for a solid third ventricular craniopharyngioma requires a modified orbitozygomatic craniotomy, so an inferior-to-superior subfrontal operative trajectory facilitates handling of the superior pole of the tumor without aggressive retraction of the basal frontal lobe.
额下经终板入路是一种受限的、不能安全扩大的非弹性手术通道，用此入路全切肿瘤可能存在一定困难。	The subfrontal translamina terminalis approach is a restricted, nonflexible operative corridor that cannot be safely expanded. Gross total tumor resection can be problematic.
将其改良为前纵裂入路或许可提供更多的手术操作空间，但无法做到微创。	The anterior interhemispheric modification of this approach may provide more extended operative space but is not minimally disruptive.
该入路手术通道狭窄，术后常导致认知功能下降，最可能的原因是对脑室壁盲操作造成的。	The manipulations required through this narrow corridor often lead to cognitive decline, most likely because of blind dealings with the ventricular wall.
尽管使用了眶颧开颅，也无法完全避免牵拉额叶。	Despite use of an orbitozygomatic craniotomy, a fair amount of retraction on the frontal lobe is necessary.
图1三脑室实性颅咽管瘤是眶颧开颅额下经终板入路的良好指征	Figure 1: A predominately solid craniopharyngioma of the third ventricle is a reasonable candidate for the subfrontal translamina terminalis approach using an orbitozygomatic craniotomy.
第三脑室内肿瘤术前具体注意事项，可参考《脑室内肿瘤手术原则》这一章节。	For a specific discussion of the preoperative considerations for third ventricular tumors, see the Principles of Intraventricular Surgery chapter.
术前须对内分泌和眼科状况进行评估。	Preoperative endocrinological and ophthalmological evaluations are necessary.
该术式适合累及终板、三脑室底且前、下极没有被视通路覆盖的肿瘤。	The lamina terminalis should be affected by the tumor and the optic apparatus should not be covering the anterior and inferior poles of the tumor. The floor of the ventricle should also be affected by the tumor.
三脑室底完整时禁用该入路，但适用经胼胝体-室间孔-静脉-脉络裂入路（transcallosal transforaminal transvenous transchoroidal approach）。	An intact third ventricular floor is a contraindication for the use of this route and supports the use of the transcallosal transforaminal transvenous transchoroidal approach.
终板解剖概述如下图。	The anatomy of the lamina terminalis is summarized in the following images.
图2：上排图显示了较薄的终板（黄色箭头）与视交叉的关系。	Figure 2: The upper images demonstrate the attenuated texture of the lamina terminalis (yellow arrows) in relation to the chiasm.
下排图为经终板观察第三脑室，这需广泛解剖分离前纵裂，并充分牵拉双侧额叶才能获得，并不是手术视野。	A view of the third ventricle through the lamina is depicted in the lower image, however, this is a non-operative view achieved via an anterior interhemispheric dissection requiring undue retraction on bilateral frontal lobes.
注意终板与前交通动脉复合体的关系密切（图片由AL Rhoton, Jr授权）。	Note the intimate relationship of the anterior communicating artery complex to the lamina (images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr).
眶颧开颅-额下经终板入路	SUBFRONTAL TRANSLAMINA TERMINALIS APPROACH VIA AN ORBITOZYGOMATIC CRANIOTOMY
此入路尤其适用于突破终板向鞍上小部分生长的实性肿瘤。	This approach is especially favorable if the solid tumor extends through the lamina terminalis and has a small suprasellar component.
肿瘤主体如位于鞍上，则通过内镜下经鼻蝶-终板入路切除。	Tumors with primarily suprasellar components are resected through the endoscopic transnasal transsphenoidal translamina terminalis approach.
额下经终板入路的优势在于提供了对终板、视神经、视交叉、双侧颈内动脉、前交通动脉复合体、双侧A2段、后交通动脉、相应穿支以及垂体柄的良好视野。	This subfrontal translamina terminalis approach offers the advantage of providing excellent visualization of the lamina terminalis, optic nerves, optic chiasm, bilateral internal carotid arteries, anterior communicating artery complex, bilateral A2 segments, posterior communicating arteries, associated perforating branches, and the pituitary stalk.
图3：额下经终板入路对三脑室前部的显露有限，但适用于终板及手术通路受肿瘤侵袭而扩大的病变。	Figure 3: The subfrontal translamina terminalis approach provides a limited exposure to the anterior third ventricle and is suitable for lesions enlarging the lamina terminalis and the associated operative pathway.
眶上开颅并眶缘切除是该手术方向上另一种可选择的颅底入路。	A supraorbital craniotomy and orbital rim osteotomy is another reasonable skull base approach for this operative pathway.
在到达终板的过程中，需动态牵拉并广泛解剖分离双侧视神经上的蛛网膜，牵开方向应要平行于同侧的视神经。	The use of dynamic retraction and wide arachnoidal dissection over bilateral optic nerves are necessary in reaching the lamina terminalis. The vector of retraction is parallel to the ipsilateral optic nerve.
图4：要显露终板并经其操作，必须适度牵拉额叶。	Figure 4: A fair amount of frontal lobe retraction is necessary to expose and work through the lamina terminalis.
终板被肿瘤侵犯后，其颜色与视交叉相比，明显变得浅灰。	The lamina is invaded by the tumor and has a distinct grayish color compared to the chiasm.
在切开终板时，必须仔细保护视交叉，在视交叉上充分细致解剖，辨清终板的确切边界。	The chiasm must be carefully protected from the incision in the lamina. Generous microsurgical dissection over the chiasm allows identification of the exact borders of the lamina.
图5：经左侧眶颧开颅显露终板（术前相关图像见图1），浅灰色的肿瘤致终板扩大。	Figure 5: This is an exposure of the lamina terminalis via a left-sided orbitozygomatic craniotomy (see Figure 1 for the corresponding preoperative scans). The grayish tumor has expanded the lamina.
已标记出前交通动脉复合体，	The anterior communicating artery complex (AComm) is labeled.
要避免过度牵拉血管结构。	Undue retraction of this vascular structure should be avoided.
读者可体会手术通道的狭窄。	You can appreciate the narrow operative corridor.
图6：动态牵拉可精准扩大显微器械操作的手术空间。	Figure 6: Dynamic retraction allows precise expansion of the operative corridor at the working site of the instruments.
将肿瘤减容后从术腔取出（参见上图5）。	The tumor is debulked and rolled out of the resection cavity (see Figure 5 above).
经终板入路存在很多手术盲点，	There are numerous blind spots associated with the translamina terminalis approach.
这些盲点包括三脑室后方、上方以及同侧下丘脑壁。	These blind spots include the posterior and superior aspects of the third ventricle and the ipsilateral wall of the hypothalamus.
因此，过度牵拉不可避免，这就会损伤穹隆柱、视上核、终板血管器、灰结节和穿支血管。	Consequently, excessive retraction is unavoidable, causing injury to the fornix, the supraoptic nuclei, the organ vasculosum, the tuber cinerum, and perforating vessels.
如果肿瘤长入鞍区，则鞍内部分可通过双侧视神经间隙（第I间隙）切除。	If the tumor reaches into the sella, the intrasellar portion of the tumor may be removed via the corridor between the optic nerves.
但笔者不推荐这种操作，因为盲操作易损伤视神经及其穿支血管而导致并发症，若视交叉前置则会进一步限制了操作空间。	However, I do not recommend this maneuver because of its associated morbidity that results from the blind manipulation of the optic nerves and their perforating vessels. The prefix chiasm can limit this working space.
图7：中间的术中图片标出了终板的薄层膜（*）。	Figure 7: The thin membrane of the lamina terminalis is shown in the middle intraoperative photo (*).
其它图片（顺时针方向）详细描绘了下丘脑错构瘤的手术切除。	The other illustrations (clockwise) detail the operative maneuvers for resection of a hypothalamic hamartoma.
关于脑室肿瘤患者的术后管理，请详见《脑室内手术原则》章节。	For a detailed discussion of recommendations for postoperative care of patients with ventricular tumors, see the Principles of Intraventricular Surgery chapter.
· 额下经终板入路有其局限性，适用于经鼻内镜无法切除的小肿瘤。	The subfrontal translamina terminalis approach is restrictive and should be used in the case of small tumors that are not amenable to its endoscopic transnasal counterpart.
经此入路全切体积较大的肿瘤无可避免的会过度牵拉肿瘤周围正常神经血管结构，可能导致术后并发症。	Gross total resection of large tumors is problematic and not usually feasible without undue retraction on the surrounding normal neurovascular structures.
AVM术中破裂紧急处理技巧	Intraoperative Rupture and Complication Management
动静脉畸形的术中破裂，相比于其他术中可能遇到的情况，是一项非常独特的挑战。	Intraoperative rupture (IOR) of an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) presents unique challenges to the surgeon unlike any others.
与动脉瘤手术相比，在动静脉畸形破裂时不能够通过近端阻断来迅速控制出血情况。	In contrast to aneurysm surgery, there is no proximal control that can save the surgeon and bring the situation under control quickly.
动静脉畸形术中破裂的处理是对于神经外科医生的沉着和成熟度，及技术技巧的最高级别的检测。	The AVM’s IOR tests the surgeon’s highest level of temperament and maturity, as well as his or her technical fluency and efficiency.
最好的应对方式是避免引起动静脉畸形的破裂。	The best strategy for managing an IOR is to avoid it.
因此我们需要深究导致动静脉畸形术中破裂的根本原因。	Therefore, we must analyze the most common underlying causes for IOR during AVM surgery.
笔者曾遇到过许多在处理主要引流静脉下方的供血动脉出血时，无意中损伤引流静脉而导致的畸形血管团术中破裂。	I have been involved with numerous IORs because of an inadvertent injury to the primary draining vein during management of bleeding from a feeding vessel underneath this major draining vein.
笔者也曾在打开硬膜的过程中误伤重要静脉。	I have also accidentally injured primary veins during the dural opening.
激进地对畸形血管团或包裹在畸形血管团上的主要引流静脉进行电凝，会导致动静脉畸形引流系统的骤然改变，从而不可避免的导致更严重的情况。	Aggressive coagulation of the nidus or the primary vein wrapped on the deep walls of the nidus leads to acute changes in the AVM’s drainage systems and is a guaranteed recipe for disaster.
在开硬膜的过程中，术者应尽可能去保护静脉，并且完整的保留跨越静脉处的硬膜。	During dural opening, the surgeon should consider all of the factors necessary to preserve the vein and leave the dura over the vein intact.
过分追求紧贴静脉切开硬膜可能会带来损害。	Overzealous efforts to dissect the dura along the vein can be harmful.
通常在主要引流静脉的下方，会有1-3条较大的供血动脉；由于重要静脉下方的空间较小，这些动脉处理起来通常比较困难。	There are often one to three sizable feeding arteries under the primary draining vein; these arteries present unique challenges in their control because of the limited space available underneath the vital vein for their manipulation.
最好在早期不要过度处理靠近主要静脉或畸形血管团附近的供血动脉。	It is best not to aggressively and cavalierly manipulate the supplying vessels near the vein or the AVM nidus early in dissection.
处理动静脉畸形经验较少的医生常因为这种看似无辜的动机而陷入危机：	It is not uncommon for a novice AVM surgeon to get into trouble despite seemingly innocent maneuvers.
术者试图阻止白质内动脉的出血，但却在畸形血管团上造成破口。	The surgeon attempts to stop bleeding from an annoying white matter feeder, but instead finds himself or herself creating a defect in the nidus.
术者可能会试图使用双极去电凝供血动脉和畸形血管团，	At this point, it is tempting to use bipolar forceps and continue coagulating the feeder and the wall of the nidus.
然而这些操作只会导致更多的出血，迫使术者不断地进行的盲目电凝，从而激发畸形团内血流改变，出血会更加猛烈。	However, these maneuvers invariably lead to more nidal bleeding, forcing the surgeon to continue a vicious cycle of increasingly indiscriminate coagulation, which provokes even more torrential bleeding because of flow changes within the nidus.
随后，术者可能会损伤动静脉畸形血管团周围的主要引流静脉，	Before long, the surgeon injures the draining pedicle of the AVM leading to the primary vein around the circumference of the nidus.
破裂随之而来，猛烈的出血让医师反思为何会发生这种情况。	IOR ensues, and torrential bleeding leaves the surgeon questioning why this happened.
在动静脉畸形供血动脉全部切断之前，畸形血管团内部承受不住急剧的血流动力学改变。	Acute hemodynamic alternations within the nidus are not tolerated before all the major feeding vessels to the AVM are disconnected.
这一概念似乎总被低估。	This importance of this concept seems to be underestimated
动静脉畸形手术常常以优雅的显微外科操作开始，但却可能以极其血腥的方式收场，让外科医生受窘，并使患者留有严重的后遗症。	AVM surgery usually starts as the most beautiful, elegant, and pristine microsurgical operation, but it can finish as the bloodiest, most disruptive, and humbling one, leaving the pride of the embarrassed surgeon wounded and the patient facing serious complications.
动静脉畸形的破裂意味着它在这场和外科医生的战斗中取得胜利。	AVM rupture indicates that the patient and the surgeon have lost the battle and the AVM has won.
在这种情况下，笔者回顾了一些手术视频，对手术计划和执行失误进行了分析。	In these situations, I review the recorded video of the operation after surgery and analyze the lapses in strategic planning and execution.
这些从手术视频中获得的教训较为客观，其重要性不容忽视。	An objective and critical review of the video provides important lessons that cannot be undervalued.
动静脉畸形术中破裂的并发症处理	Complication Management during IOR of an AVM
当面对动静脉畸形术中时，	When I find myself facing torrential IOR during AVM surgery.
笔者会先退后一步，通过放大的视野来对术野进行观察，然后考量笔者的选择及相应后果。	I step back, inspect the operative field through demagnified oculars, and consider all of my options and their consequences.
无论笔者对接下来的过程多么清楚，这个观察的步骤都很重要，可以防止潜在的外科条件反射行为。	No matter how sure I am of the next step, this maneuver is important to prevent additional potentially calamitous reflexive operative responses.
术者的任何鲁莽操作都可能给患者神经功能带来极大代价。	Any seemingly audacious maneuver by the surgeon can make the patient pay a heavy price with a catastrophic neurological result.
这种紧迫、高压的情况，正是对术者成熟度的考验。	The maturity of the surgeon is tested when the fatigued surgeon is under intense pressure and has little time to respond.
如果发生巨大的出血，笔者会使用较大孔径的吸引器清理术野，并追踪血流。	If torrential bleeding occurs, I use a large bore suction to clear the field and follow the flow of the blood.
在放大的术野中，即使是技术纯熟的外科医生也会被快速涌出的血液打乱阵脚。	The rapid and spiraling rise in the tide of blood in the operative field under the magnified view of the microscope is unsettling and affects the composure of the most skillful surgeon.
一旦找到出血点，接下来的操作即被迅速并谨慎的计划出来。	Once the sources of bleeding are found, the next steps are planned quickly, but thoughtfully.
笔者会和麻醉师沟通，以便在关键时刻做出恰当的处理。	I communicate with the anesthesiologist regarding the critical state of the operation so the appropriate steps are taken.
笔者也会确认患者的收缩压保持在低于正常压力的20%左右。	I also confirm that the patient’s systolic blood pressure is at least temporarily approximately 20% below normal.
应注意避免血压过低，降低脑缺血的风险。	Profound hypotension is avoided to minimize the risk of cerebral ischemia.
动脉性出血	Arterial Bleeding
动脉性出血通常位于脑实质，且多为白质内的供血动脉。	Arterial bleeders are on the parenchymal side and are often deep white matter feeders.
这些供血血管发育高度不良，是动静脉畸形手术中最大的技术挑战。	These feeders are highly dysplastic and create the most technical challenge in AVM surgery.
这些血管很容易痉挛收缩到白质内，导致远端颅内出血及颅高压，迫使术者在切除动静脉畸形前选择仓促关颅。	They can easily retract into the white matter and lead to symptomatic remote intracerebral hemorrhage and brain tension, forcing the issue of premature closure before AVM removal.
如果出血活跃，应禁止术野填塞。	When brisk arterial bleeding occurs, packing the operative field is prohibited.
应使用大孔径吸引器清理术野，术者应追寻出血点。	A large bore suction is used to clear the field, and the surgeon pursues the flow of blood to find the source.
接下来，术者应使用小脑棉覆盖在出血点旁，防止吸引器损伤正常脑组织。	Next, the surgeon uses a small cottonoid patty to cover the area next to the bleeding point so that the force of the suction does not remove healthy brain tissue.
这些在白质深部的供血动脉缺乏可变形组织和平滑肌层，因此不易通过双极电凝止血。	The deep white matter feeders have little elastic tissue and smooth muscle layer, and therefore they do not constrict upon bipolar coagulation.
相反，它们会缩进白质内并继续猛烈的出血。	Instead, they continue to bleed vigorously and retract into the white matter.
位于白质内的供血动脉，应少量切除血管周围白质，在动静脉畸形的远端迅速暴露出血动脉，暴露至较为正常的节段，将出血血管部分吸入吸引器中进行牵拉，并沿暴露阶段进行电凝。	Deep white matter feeders must be isolated via removal of a small amount of the white matter immediately around them; their more normal segment away from the nidus is then exposed and coagulated along a portion of their segment by drawing a section of the bleeding vessel into the barrel of the suction device.
这一操作很重要，以避免动静脉畸形手术的相关发病率。	This maneuver is critical to avoid unnecessary morbidity associated with AVM surgery.
图1. 与皮层动脉相比，白质深部的小动脉的可变形组织和平滑肌层较少，因此不易通过电凝止血（上图）。	Figure 1: In contrast with cortical arterioles, the small caliber deep white matter feeders have little elastic tissue and smooth muscle layers, and therefore do not constrict upon bipolar coagulation (upper images).
它们可能会继续猛烈的出血，并缩到白质内，导致远离动静脉畸形部位的颅内出血。	They may continue to bleed vigorously, retract into the white matter, and cause intracerebral hemorrhage in an area of the brain away from the AVM.
白质深部出血的供血动脉应别定位，并动过移除小部分周围白质的方式暴露部分血管至相对正常的节段（左下图），远离畸形血管团，在此部位进行电凝或夹闭（右下图）。	Deep white matter feeders must be pursued and isolated via removal of a small amount of the white matter immediately around them (left lower image) so that their more proximal segment with relatively normal walls, away from the nidus, is preferably coagulated or clip ligated (right lower image).
在出血部位填压止血材料达不到有效的止血，只会给术者成功止血的假象，并导致由远处颅内出血引起的脑肿胀。	Packing the bleeding site with hemostatic materials will not attain hemostasis; this only provides the surgeon with a false sense of security and leads to brain swelling because of remote intracerebral hematomas.
在小动脉不能通过电凝方式止血时，可以使用动静脉畸形显微动脉夹（笔者更倾向于使用较小的动脉瘤夹）。	AVM microclips may be used (I prefer small aneurysm miniclips) if the small feeder continues to resist coagulation.
一般情况下，笔者通常不使用夹闭的方式，因为其效果不可靠，且其会影响后续显微操作。	In general, I avoid clips because they can be at times unreliable in their effect and their bulk interferes with the next steps of microdissection.
笔者曾目睹临近正常皮层的破裂，和血肿腔内压力不断增加后穿透低阻力区形成的喷射性出血，都是有这些被忽视的白质内动脉造成的。	I have also witnessed eruptive rupture of the adjacent normal cortex and explosive bleeding from this rupture site as the pressure gradient finds the path of least resistance to decompress the hematoma cavity caused by an overlooked white matter feeder.
使用止血材料覆盖出血点会给术者带来已经确切止血的假象。	Covering the bleeding points with hemostatic materials, including Surgicel, provides a false sense of security to the surgeon.
如果不能控制好室管膜和脑室脉络膜的动脉，可能造成严重的脑室内出血和骤然脑肿胀。	Loss of control over the ependymal and periventricular choroidal feeders can lead to massive intraventricular hemorrhage and sudden brain swelling.
这种出血很难被术者发现，可能仅以手术通道变窄和脑肿胀表现出来。	This type of bleeding may not be apparent in any form to the operator; its only presentation involves unexpected narrowing of the operative corridor and brain swelling.
因此，在处理动静脉畸形深部时发现此情况，笔者会随即探查术腔深部及临近的脑室，查看是否有进行性增大的血肿。	Therefore, if such brain swelling is encountered during dissection at the depth of the AVM, I immediately inspect first the depth of the cavity, and then the adjacent ventricle for an expanding hematoma.
如发现有这种进行性出血，笔者会顺着血流方向，清除挫伤的脑组织，暴露回缩到白质内未被确切止血的较大穿支动脉。	Under these unfortunate circumstances, I follow the trail of blood and remove the contused brain tissue only to find a deeply retracted large white matter perforator that previously seemed to have been under control.
这让笔者意识到对于白质内的供血动脉的精细止血至关重要，尤其是供应额部和基底节的动静脉畸形的豆纹动脉穿支，供应岛叶动静脉畸形的岛叶穿支动脉，和供应丘脑动静脉畸形的丘脑穿支动脉。	This complication has taught me that meticulous hemostasis of white matter feeders (especially the lenticulostriate perforators to frontal and basal ganglia AVMs, insular perforators to insular AVMs, and thalamoperforators to thalamic AVMs) cannot be underestimated.
这些动脉通常有足够长的节段可供用于确切止血。	A sizable segment of these white matter feeders must be available for their complete obliteration.
虽然可以使用夹闭的方式止血，但若没有足够正常的血管壁作为保证，这些发育不良的节段还可能发生破裂，以致严重后果。	Despite their clip ligation, if enough segment of the vessel with relatively normal walls is not secured, the incompetent dysplastic segment can rupture later and lead to catastrophe.
畸形血管团出血	Nidus Bleeding
畸形血管团的小出血可以通过温和的电凝来控制。	Minor bleeding from the nidus may be controlled using gentle coagulation.
但如果是畸形血管团上较大的破口所导致的出血，笔者会使用小脑棉对破口轻柔填塞。	However, if the bleeding is from a large defect within the nidus, I plug the defect with a small piece of cotton and gentle tamponade.
耐心等待，并用生理盐水冲洗，通常都能够控制出血。	Patience and saline irrigation often control the situation.
一味地电凝破口部只会使破口扩大，而且会导致畸形血管团内血流动力学的突然改变。	Coagulation of large defects enlarges the defect.
当有活动性出血时，这种突然变化会加重术中出血情况。	Moreover, this maneuver can lead to sudden hemodynamic changes with the nidus, and in the presence of live feeding vessels, this can cause more extensive IORs.
静脉性出血	Venous Bleeding
主要引流静脉的微小损伤可以通过轻柔双极电凝来处理，而不影响静脉内的血流。	Very minor injury to the primary vein can be managed with gentle bipolar coagulation to close the defect without scarifying the flow within the lumen of the vein.
此外，使用小脑棉轻柔填压也可以有效的处理较小的静脉性出血。	In addition, a small cottonoid patty and gentle tamponade can be effective.
如果笔者在找到并处理供血动脉前，不可避免的撕裂静脉且不能进行修复，笔者不会阻断静脉。在这种情况下阻断静脉会使动静脉畸形突然破裂、立即发生脑肿胀。	If I inadvertently tear the vein beyond any chance of repair before the large feeding arteries are encountered and sacrificed, I do not occlude the vein, because this maneuver will lead to sudden AVM rupture and immediate brain swelling.
在找到并切断畸形血管团的供血动脉前，笔者不会处理此时的静脉出血，而是用大孔径的吸引器清理术野。	I allow the vein to bleed while I efficiently find the feeding arteries of the nidus and disconnect them while using a large bore suction to clear the field.
较小的供血动脉可以留到稍后处理。	Smaller feeding vessels are left for later.
图2.笔者在处理这个额叶中央旁动静脉畸形的供血动脉时，不可避免的损伤到了临近的主要引流静脉（位于双极镊尖）。	Figure 2: I inadvertently injured the primary vein during coagulation of the nearby feeding arteries (at the tip of bipolar forceps) of this paramedian frontal AVM.
此时，半球内供血动脉还未进行处理。	The interhemispheric feeders were still untouched at the time of this event.
在没有其他修补方式可选时，笔者误将主要引流静脉进行了电凝。	I mistakenly coagulated the primary vein as no other repair option was deemed available.
这一操作导致了动静脉畸形破裂和猛烈的出血。	This unfortunate maneuver led to massive rupture of the AVM and torrential bleeding.
图3. 颞叶外侧相对较小的动静脉畸形，与前方的静脉相连（第一排）。	Figure 3: A relatively small lateral temporal AVM associated with an arterialized vein of Labbe underwent resection (first row).
动静脉畸形的脑表展示；主要的引流静脉包裹着畸形血管团，在切除畸形血管团的过程中不可避免的受到了损伤（第二排）。	The surface anatomy of the AVM is shown; during dissection of the nidus, the dominant draining vein that was wrapping around the nidus was inadvertently injured (second row).
动静脉畸形被迅速的切除，以避免过度出血及颅内出血（第三排）。	The AVM was removed immediately to avoid excessive bleeding and development of intracerebral hemorrhage (last row).
请观看本章开头相关视频及相应的处理方式。	Please see the corresponding video at the beginning of this chapter for subsequent management strategies.
对供血动脉的三维病理解剖学的认识十分重要。	A clear understanding of the three-dimensional pathoanatomy of the dominant feeding arteries is pertinent for their timely exclusion.
显微镜的口内控制器在手术中起着重要的作用，无需用手柄来控制显微镜。	The mouthpiece of the microscope plays a key role in the chain of events because I can quickly maneuver the scope with no need to use the scope handles.
快速、有效的切除动静脉畸形是必要的。此外，术者还应保持冷静、果敢，掌控手术进程。	A “commando” operation with the goal of efficiently removing the AVM is necessary, and the surgeon must remain calm, decisive, and in control.
出血不应该吓倒外科医生，出血就只是出血。	Bleeding should not overwhelm the surgeon; it is only bleeding.
成功的处理动静脉畸形的术中破裂需要成熟的外科医生做出正确的抉择。	Successful execution of the decisive operative maneuvers during IOR is required for the maturity of every AVM surgeon.
此外，成功的突击操作会增加外科医生处理复杂动静脉畸形的信心。	Moreover, the successful completion of the commando operation augments the confidence of the surgeon for managing complex AVMs.
最后的想法	Final Thoughts
有些医生可以力挽狂澜，有些医生洞察变化，有些医生还不知道发生了什么。	Some surgeons make things happen, some surgeons watch things happen, and some surgeons wonder what happened.
在动静脉畸形术中破裂时，我们都想成为那个能够力挽狂澜的医生。	To save the patient during an AVM’s IOR, we all want to be the surgeon who makes things happen.
巨大侵袭性垂体腺瘤	Giant and Multicompartmental Pituitary Adenomas
巨大垂体腺瘤通常指肿瘤直径大于4cm，一般距离Monro孔6mm内。	Giant pituitary adenomas are usually described as tumors larger than 4 cm that generally extend within 6 mm of the foramen of Monro.
据报道其占手术病例的5%至14%。	They are reported in 5% to 14% of surgical pituitary tumor series.
巨大垂体腺瘤的组织学特性与肿瘤大小及侵袭性无关，多为良性。	The histologic characteristics of giant pituitary adenomas do not correlate with their size or invasive nature; most of these tumors contain benign cells.
大多数巨大垂体腺瘤需要手术切除，特别巨大的泌乳素腺瘤除外，因为其对多巴胺受体激动药物治疗有较高的反应和消退恢复的几率。	Most giant pituitary adenomas require surgical excision. An exception to this rule is the rare giant prolactinoma, which has a high rate of response and regression with dopamine agonist therapy.
在上世纪，巨大垂体腺瘤的手术经历了从伴有高风险的经颅肉眼手术，到显微镜开颅手术，最终到经鼻内镜经蝶手术的演变，改善了病人预后。	Over the last century, surgery for giant pituitary adenomas has evolved from transcranial macrosurgical techniques associated with significant morbidity to transcranial microsurgical techniques, and ultimately to endonasal endoscopic transsphenoidal approaches with improved patient outcomes.
然而，经验不足者，经鼻入路可能无法全切肿瘤，尤其是巨大垂体腺瘤。	However, in inexperienced hands, the transnasal approaches can potentially result in subtotal resection of pituitary tumors and especially the giant ones.
残留的肿瘤能引起术后出血，导致失明和丘脑功能障碍等不可逆的神经功能恶化。	The residual tumor can induce a postoperative apoplectic event, leading to irreversible neurologic deterioration including blindness and thalamic dysfunction.
有多种分类系统用来描述侵袭性垂体腺瘤。	Many classification systems have been used to describe multicompartmental pituitary adenomas.
Yasargil把其分为4个亚型：1. 鞍上-视交叉上型：肿瘤生长超过蝶骨平台上2cm且在视交叉前；2. 鞍上-鞍后型：肿瘤长入脚间池；3. 鞍旁-海绵窦型：肿瘤侵入海绵窦；4. 全面浸润型：肿瘤向各个方向生长。	Yasargil classified those tumors into four subgroups: 1) suprasellar-suprachiasmatic: tumors that grow more than 2 cm above the planum sphenoidale and in front of the chiasm, 2) suprasellar-retrosellar: tumors that extend into the interpenduncular cisterns, 3) parasellar-cavernous: tumors that extend into the cavernous sinuses, and 4) paninvasive: tumors that extend in all directions.
类似的，Hardy最初将肿瘤分为四种类型：a. 向视交叉池生长的肿瘤；b. 向三脑室生长的肿瘤；c. 向Monroe孔生长的肿瘤；d. 向前、中颅底生长的肿瘤。	Similarly, Hardy initially classified tumors into four types: (A) tumors with extension into chiasmatic cisterns, (B) tumors with extension into the third ventricle, (C) tumors with extension toward the foramen of Monroe, and (D) tumors extending into the anterior or middle cranial fossae.
之后，改良Hardy分类法，把c型改为长入三脑室达到3cm的肿瘤，而d型为肿瘤长入三脑室大于3cm，超过Monroe孔；并且这两型肿瘤至少达到蝶轭上2cm，才能诊断为巨大垂体腺瘤。	A modified Hardy classification was subsequently constructed in which grade C tumors with 3 cm of extension into the third ventricle and grade D tumors with more than 3 cm of extension beyond the foramen of Monroe, each with at least 2 cm of extension superior to the jugum sphenoidale, were considered giant macroadenomas.
图1.巨大垂体腺瘤有多种形态，肿瘤形态学可以显著影响手术切除难度。	Figure 1: Giant pituitary adenomas can present in a variety of shapes; the morphology of the tumor can significantly affect the technical difficulty of resection.
上排照片显示的是圆润的球形垂体腺瘤，海绵窦侵犯不明显。	A compact globular morphology is shown in the images in the top row. Cavernous sinus invasion is not evident.
内镜经鼻蝶手术能在有效地保护垂体的同时全切肿瘤（下图）。	Endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery is effective in gross total tumor resection while preserving the pituitary gland (bottom row).
图2.显著侵犯海绵窦的不对称肿瘤（上图），这种形态的肿瘤提示更多技术挑战，有效的切除肿瘤比较困难。	Figure 2: The asymmetric tumors with significant cavernous sinus invasion are included (top row of images); this morphology provides more technical challenges and effective resection is unlikely.
经蝶手术成功切除这个囊性肿瘤的大部分瘤体，但是无法到达侧方海绵窦内部分（下图）。	Transsphenoidal surgery was successful for removal of the majority of this partially cystic tumor, but the lateral intracavernous component was not reachable (bottom row).
注意蝶鞍填塞的脂肪（鞍内高信号部分-译者注）。	Please note the fat packing in the sella.
图3.这个肿瘤多叶、不对称的外形，使得在非常狭窄的手术通道内切除肿瘤时到达肿瘤的顶部面临诸多挑战。	Figure 3: The mutilobulated and asymmetric morphology of this tumor led to a number of challenges during its resection due to the very narrow operative corridors available to reach the tumor’s apex.
首次内镜下经蝶窦、海绵窦入路手术缓解了肿瘤对视路的影响，只是切除部分肿瘤（下排图）。	The initial endoscopic transsphenoidal transcavernous approach relieved the mass effect on the optic apparatus, but only part of the tumor was removed (bottom row of images).
之后进行了经颅（翼点）手术。	A transcranial (pterional) operation was subsequently undertaken.
侵犯海绵窦肿瘤的手术相关解剖	Operative Anatomy as Related to Tumor Extension into the Cavernous Sinus
海绵窦是硬膜外的血管性间隙，位于中颅窝硬膜内侧部的脑膜层和骨内膜层之间。	The cavernous sinuses are extradural vascular spaces and are formed by the space between the meningeal and endosteal layers of the medial part of the middle fossa dura.
海绵窦内侧壁包含两部分：蝶鞍部和蝶窦部。	The medial wall of the cavernous sinus contains two parts: sellar and sphenoidal.
蝶鞍把垂体和海绵窦内容物分开，蝶窦部位于蝶骨体的外侧并与颈动脉沟关系密切。	The sellar part separates the pituitary gland from the contents of the cavernous sinus. The sphenoidal part lies lateral to the body of sphenoid bone and is related to the carotid sulcus.
海绵窦的外侧壁由两层组成，骨内膜层包裹着颅神经穿过静脉窦的外侧壁。	The lateral wall of the cavernous sinus is composed of two layers. The endosteal layer encases the cranial nerves traversing the lateral wall of this venous sinus.
海绵窦内的颈内动脉可直接接触垂体的外侧缘或者被静脉窦隔开。	The intracavernous carotid artery may be in direct contact with the lateral edge of the pituitary gland or separated by a venous space.
图4.海绵窦内侧壁及其与颈内动脉海绵窦段、垂体的关系（如上图）。	Figure 4: The medial wall of the cavernous sinus with its relationship to the cavernous carotid and the pituitary gland are shown (upper photos).
请注意海绵窦内外展神经、翼管神经位置与颈内动脉的关系（中间和下图所示）。（图片使用经AL Rhoton, Jr授权）	Please note the location of the abducens nerve within the cavernous sinus and the position of the vidian nerve in relation to the carotid artery (middle and bottom photos). (Images courtesy of AL Rhoton, Jr.)
肿瘤向海绵窦的侵袭程度通常用Knosp-Steiner标准来描述。	The degree of cavernous sinus invasion is usually described using the Knosp-Steiner Criteria.
Knosp标准是基于对冠状位磁共振成像（MRI）上垂体与颈内动脉海绵窦段的评估。	Knosp described this criteria based on evaluation of coronal magnetic resonance (MR) imaging scans that include the gland and the cavernous carotid arteries.
0级：对海绵窦内侧壁无侵袭；1级：肿瘤延伸至颈内动脉海绵窦段内侧；2级：肿瘤延伸到动脉外侧；3级：肿瘤延伸至颈内动脉外侧，但不没有填充海绵窦；4级：肿瘤填充海绵窦。	Grade 0: no invasion of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus; Grade 1: the tumor extends up to the medial aspect of the cavernous carotid artery; Grade 2: the tumor extends to the lateral aspect of the artery; Grade 3: the tumor extends lateral to the artery, but does not fill the cavernous sinus; Grade 4: the tumor fills the cavernous sinus.
诊断、手术适应症、术前评估	Diagnosis, Indications for Surgery, and Preoperative Considerations
请参阅脑肿瘤卷《垂体大腺瘤》章节的讨论。	Please refer to the chapter discussing Pituitary Macroadenoma in the Brain Tumor Volume.
扩大经鼻内镜入路切除巨大垂体腺瘤	EXTENDED ENDOSCOPIC ENDONASAL APPROACH TO GIANT PITUITARY ADENOMA
经颅入路是巨大垂体瘤的传统治疗方法。	Transcranial approaches have traditionally been described for management of giant pituitary adenomas.
扩大内镜经鼻入路的手术通路增宽，在有经验的外科医生看来，几乎可以取代经颅入路用于切除巨大肿瘤。	However, in experienced hands, the extended endoscopic endonasal approaches with their broadened operative trajectories have almost eradicated the need to use transcranial corridors for resection of giant tumors.
笔者认为没有必要联合或同时经鼻、经颅手术切除哪怕是最巨大的垂体腺瘤。	I do not believe combined/concurrent transnasal and transcranial approaches are necessary for even the most giant tumors.
事实上，内镜入路与显微镜经颅手术相比，前者提高了解剖学区分肿瘤和正常组织的分辨率。	Indeed, the endoscopic approach provides improved resolution for differentiating tumor from anatomically normal tissue when compared with microscopic transcranial approaches.
重要的是，得到改善的内镜视野可以较显微手术更安全、更积极的切除巨大腺瘤难以切除的部分。	Importantly, the improved endoscopic visualization allows safer and more aggressive intrasellar microsurgery to remove the difficult-to-reach components of the giant tumors.
这也是切除视交叉后的肿瘤最实用的入路。	This approach is also the most practical route to the tumor in the retrochiasmatic space.
而经颅入路对于这种特定区域的肿瘤存在局限。	The practical transcranial approaches to this specific region are limited.
传统的显微镜经蝶入路与内镜经鼻入路相比，后者可以切除蝶骨平台和鞍结节，为向鞍上生长的多间隙肿瘤提供了额外的无遮挡视野。	When comparing the traditional microscope-assisted transsphenoidal approach with the endoscopic endonasal approach, the latter operative route allows resection of the planum sphenoidale and tuberculum sellae, providing an additional unobstructed view of the suprasellar extension of the multicompartmental tumors.
同样，扩大入路为斜坡提供了宽广视野，能够顺利切除延伸到蝶窦后方的肿瘤。	Similarly, an extended approach affords wide visualization of the clivus and unobstructed resection of adenomas that extend posterior to the sphenoid sinus.
此外，扩大经鼻内镜入路可以通过成角内镜和剥离子，通过从内向外的视角切除侵入海绵窦的肿瘤。	Furthermore, the extended endoscopic approach permits resection of the tumor extending into the cavernous sinus from a mediolateral viewpoint via angled endoscopes and dissectors.
这种方法可最大程度减少对位于硬膜窦外侧壁的神经血管的损伤。	The mediolateral operative course minimizes injury to the neurovascular structures that are located on the lateral wall of the dural sinus.
遵循从鞍区到海绵窦的顺序探查和切除肿瘤，肿瘤减压后的空间，为在视野相对狭小的海绵窦切除肿瘤提供了安全有效的操作通道。	Following or “chasing” the tumor from the sella into the cavernous sinus and its decompression provides and creates the most effective corridor for safe and efficient transcavernous tumor removal along the relatively less visualisable operative corners.
非直视下肿瘤切除常撕裂穿支血管，带来灾难性的后果。	Blind tumor manipulation is a recipe for disaster and often leads to perforator avulsion.
经鼻内镜不能切除的肿瘤，可以经颅切除，或立体定向放射治疗，也可以定期复查。	Residual tumor that is unresectable from the extended transnasal approach may be removed through transcranial approaches, treated with stereotactic radiation, or monitored conservatively.
对于大部分巨大垂体腺瘤患者，笔者喜欢术前行腰大池引流。	I prefer to install a lumbar drain immediately preoperatively in most patients who have a giant pituitary adenoma.
在手术后期，注射适当气体可能有助于我们非常需要的鞍隔下降，将不容易塌陷的肿瘤推送到术野。	Injection of a modest amount of air during the later stages of tumor resection can potentially aid with the much-needed diaphragmatic descent, delivering the tumor that is not readily deliverable into the operative cavity.
病人的体位及入路	Patient Setup and Approach
经鼻内镜的一些细节要在这重申一下。	Some details of transnasal endoscopy are briefly reiterated here.
患者采取仰卧位，头枕在马蹄形头架上，便于术中动态调整头部位置。	The patient is positioned supine with his or her head on a “horseshoe” to allow for dynamic intraoperative head repositioning.
头稍微外展并抬高促进静脉回流。	The head is slightly extended and elevated to promote venous drainage.
此外，头应转向术者15°-20°，使术者的姿势更符合人体工程学。	Furthermore, the head should be turned 15 to 20 degrees toward the lead surgeon to facilitate the operator’s ergonomic body posture.
颅底广泛切除可能需要脂肪或者阔筋膜修补。	The extent of skull base resection may guide the need for a fat or fascia lata grafts.
那些鼻中隔粘膜不足以防止术后脑脊液漏的病例，需要准备腹部和大腿并铺巾。	Regardless, it is ideal to prepare and drape the abdomen and the thigh in case the nasal septal flap is insufficient for prevention of a postoperative cerebrospinal spinal fluid leak.
笔者喜欢隔着手术台，站在鼻科医生同事的对面，因为我是左利手，而他是右利手。	I like to stand across the operating table from my rhinologist colleague because I am left-handed and he is right handed.
进行显微操作时，患者的头部稍转向我，这样我就不需要向前探身。	The patient’s head is turned slightly toward me during the microsurgical part of the operation so that I do not need to lean forward.
助手和手术器械在手术台另一侧，与术者相対，有利于手术器械传递。	The surgical assistant and operative instruments are positioned on the side of the operating table, contralateral to the neurosurgeon, so that instruments can be readily transferred.
一旦病人准备好并铺巾后，内镜从左侧或右侧鼻孔进入。	Once the patient is appropriately prepped and draped, the endoscope is inserted into either the left or right nostril.
整个手术过程中手术器械进出鼻腔都要避免损伤鼻粘膜。	Throughout the operation, it is important to avoid traumatizing the nasal mucosa during the passage of the instruments.
把中鼻甲推向侧方，显露上鼻甲，再向侧方牵拉上鼻甲暴露蝶窦开口。	The middle turbinate is mobilized laterally, revealing the superior turbinate. The superior turbinate is then also retracted laterally to expose the sphenoid ostia.
电凝蝶窦开口粘膜，切除鼻中隔后部及犁状骨以增加术野的显露和让手术器械通过双侧鼻腔操作。	The mucosa surrounding the sphenoid ostia is coagulated and the posterior portion of the nasal septum and vomer are removed to increase the operative field of view and permit the use of surgical instruments through both nostrils.
接下来，用Kerrison咬骨钳咬除整个喙状蝶窦前壁。	Next, the entire rostral wall of the sphenoid sinus is removed using Kerrison rongeurs.
巨大垂体腺瘤的鞍底骨质非常薄，有时缺如；	The bone at the floor of the sella is very thin and at times nonexistent in giant tumors.
侵袭性肿瘤可侵蚀硬膜，充盈蝶窦，破坏所有的解剖标志。	Invasive tumors erode through the dura and fill the sphenoid sinus, obliterating all important operative anatomic landmarks.
切除外侧蝶骨间隔时，应尽量切除颈内动脉上的骨质。	During removal of the lateral sphenoid septa, the surgeon diligently resects the bone over the carotid arteries.
术前CT或CTA可以清晰显示颈内动脉行程及与蝶窦的关系。	Preoperative CT/CT angiography allows adequate visualization of the course of the carotid arteries and their relationship to the sphenoid sinus.
如果肿瘤生长到鞍结节或者蝶骨平台以上，就需要切除部分后组筛窦。	If the tumor extends over the tuberculum sellae or planum sphenoidale, partial removal of the posterior ethmoid sinuses may be needed.
视神经隆起、颈内动脉隆起和视神经颈内动脉凹陷可用于解剖定位。	The optic and carotid protuberances and the opticocarotid recesses are identified for anatomic orientation.
骨质切除要达到双侧海绵窦的内侧缘。	Bone removal extends over the medial edges of both cavernous sinuses.
骨质切除不充分，是导致肿瘤次全切除的最常见原因。	Inadequate bone removal is the most common cause of subtotal tumor resection.
这个原则尤其适用于巨大垂体腺瘤，如果骨质暴露不充分，侧方肿瘤无法切除，鞍上肿瘤就难以塌陷。	This principle is especially applicable to giant tumors that resist the descent of their suprasellar portion if their lateral extensions into the sella are not addressed because of restricted bone exposure.
鞍底的开放应向前延伸到鞍结节的后部。	Next, the opening of the sellar floor is extended anteriorly to include the posterior part of the tuberculum.
是否进一步切除颅底骨质（如斜坡的切除）由肿瘤个体化细节决定。	Further skull base bone removal (such as clivus resection) is dictated by the particulars of each tumor.
再次强调，宽大的骨窗暴露是处理那些鞍上部分难以塌陷的巨大肿瘤的关键操作。	Again, generous bone exposure is the key maneuver when handling giant tumors that frequently resist the descent of their suprasellar capsule into the sella.
如果术者无法检查海绵窦内侧壁并确保切除了肿瘤外侧囊壁，肿瘤的上极（类似“雪人头 head of snowman”）一般很难下降进入术野。	If I am unable to inspect the medial walls of the cavernous sinuses and assure effective removal of the lateral tumor capsule, I am most likely unable to promote the descent of the “head of the snowman” (the common shape of these tumors).
图5. 鞍底的两侧和前方骨质切除不充分（“标准”大腺瘤的“传统”骨质切除范围）阻碍术者到达肿瘤两侧和前方边界。	Figure 5: The inadequate extent of bone removal at the lateral and anterior floor of the sella (“traditional” bone removal for “standard” macroadenomas) precludes the operator from reaching the lateral and anterior borders of giant tumors.
肿瘤两侧无法满意切除，会妨碍造成症状的鞍上肿瘤下降进入术野。	Suboptimal removal of the lateral edges of the tumor will prevent the descent of the symptomatic suprasellar section.
切除肿瘤	Resection
通过MRI评估正常垂体，开始切开硬膜时，避开腺体和颈内动脉。	The normal pituitary gland should be estimated on MR imaging, and the initial dural incision should be directed away from the gland and carotid arteries.
“十”字切开硬膜，并用双极电凝牵开。	The dura is opened in the form of a cruciate incision and the flaps of dura are retracted away via their bipolar coagulation.
切开临近海绵窦的硬脑膜时，微型多普勒有助于定位海绵窦段颈内动脉。	The microDoppler is a helpful adjunct in localization of the cavernous carotid arteries during completion of dural incisions.
首先用吸引器和环形刮匙在肿瘤中间行内减压。	Tumor removal starts with central internal decompression using the suction device and ring curettes.
笔者常用两支吸引器有效的吸除容易清除的瘤体。	I often use two suction devices to remove easily deliverable tumor efficiently.
几乎所有的巨大腺瘤都是柔软的，常为囊性。	Almost all giant tumors are soft and frequently cystic.
如果肿瘤坚韧，可以用超声吸引器在直视下切除肿瘤。	If the tumor is firm, an ultrasonic aspirator is utilized under direct vision.
肿瘤切除手术步骤的顺序很重要，因为它有助于预防蛛网膜和/或鞍隔早期进入术腔，这会阻挡视野、减少充分切除肿瘤的机会。	The order of operative steps for tumor removal is important because it helps prevent premature herniation of the arachnoid and/or diaphragma sellae into the resection cavity, which would obstruct the field of view and decrease the chance for an adequate resection.
首先，应当在侧方肿瘤切除后，进行下方和中心瘤体的减压：笔者不会轻易切除肿瘤前上部分，因为这会导致鞍隔过早下降，遮挡侧方肿瘤。	First, the inferior and central portion of the tumor should be debulked followed by the lateral portions: I resist the temptation to remove the readily visible anterosuperior portions of the tumor as this would cause the diaphragm to prematurely descend, obscuring the lateral poles of the tumor.
如果肿瘤局限在鞍内（例如，没有明显侵犯海绵窦），则侧方肿瘤的囊壁可以从海绵窦内侧壁剥离。	If the tumor is well circumscribed within the sella (for example, no extension into the cavernous sinus is apparent), then the lateral tumor capsules can be peeled away from the medial wall of the sinus.
如果肿瘤侵犯到海绵窦，进入硬膜静脉窦；逐步切除肿瘤可以为暴露窦内肿瘤的提供额外空间。	If the tumor extends into the cavernous sinus, then the tumor is “chased” into the dural venous sinus; stepwise tumor debulking will provide additional space for exposure of the tumor components residing within the sinus.
打开颈内动脉外侧的海绵窦，需要非常谨慎。	Opening the cavernous sinus lateral to the carotid artery is possible and should be done with great caution.
必须有微型多普勒定位以避免血管损伤。	MicroDoppler mapping is mandatory to avoid vascular injury.
切除海绵窦内肿瘤建议采取“保守策略”。	A “conservative strategy” for intracavernous tumor removal is advised.
经海绵窦入路，需要对外展神经、动眼神经进行神经电生理监测和刺激定位，因为海绵窦内的分隔和床突韧带会被误认为神经，导致外科医生过早的停止手术。	Neurophysiological monitoring and stimulation mapping of the abducens and oculomotor nerves is necessary for the transcavernous approach as the intracavernous septations and clinoidal ligaments can be mistaken for the nerves, leading the surgeon to stop too soon.
请参考《内镜海绵窦手术》章节以获得更多细节。	Please see the Endoscopic Cavernous Sinus Surgery chapter for more details.
积极切除延伸到外侧的肿瘤后，掏空鞍上肿瘤。	Following aggressive removal of the lateral tumor extensions, the suprasellar portion of the mass is evacuated.
肿瘤需要内减压，促进肿瘤囊壁坠入蝶鞍。	The tumor should be debulked internally because this maneuver will facilitate the tumor capsule to collapse down into the sella.
另一个瘤体下降不充分的常见原因是瘤体中心减压不充分。	Another common cause of inadequate tumor descent is limited central tumor debulking.
如果尽管肿瘤切除充分，但肿瘤没有顺利下降（例如肿瘤质韧、粘连），那么经鞍结节和蝶骨平台能容易显露肿瘤囊壁前/上界，并有助于使囊壁进入鞍内。	If the tumor fails to descend despite its aggressive enucleation (for exmaple, when the tumor is firm and adherent), transtubercular and transplanum routes may facilitate visualization of the edge of the anterior/top of the tumor capsule and its mobilization into the sella.
经腰大池置管注射空气（每次10ml，最大60ml）也会有帮助。	Injection of air into the lumbar drain (10 cc aliquots, maximum of 60 cc) is also reasonable.
切除巨大垂体腺瘤时，鞍隔显得非常宽大，容易出现大块肿瘤残余在褶皱中被忽略。	The diaphragm of giant tumors becomes quite patulous during tumor removal, and sizable tumor remnants may be easily overlooked within these folds.
此外，鞍隔孔较小的沙漏型肿瘤能为那些试图解决导致症状的鞍上部分肿瘤的术者带来特别的挑战。	In addition, hour-glass-shaped tumors with a small diaphragmatic hiatus can offer special challenges to the operator who is attempting to expose the symptomatic suprasellar part of the mass.
在这样的情况下，具有全景视野的内镜，让术者能够使用钝性剥离子相对无损伤的处理鞍隔的褶皱，清除这些褶皱之间有限的空间里残留的肿瘤组织。	In these situations, the endoscope, with its panoramic field of view, allows me to use blunt dissectors to manipulate the diaphragmatic folds relatively atraumatically while additional tumor fragments are delivered out of the limited spaces between these folds.
图6. 展示的是巨大垂体腺瘤切除后，展开的鞍隔褶皱。	Figure 6: The patulous folds of the diaphragm are shown after portions of the giant adenoma have been resected.
吸引器所指的缝隙，很可能有延续到鞍上残余肿瘤。	The cleft where the suction device is located most likely contains additional tumor fragments tracking into the suprasellar space.
图7. 使用冲水法抬升鞍隔和探查裂缝里的残余肿瘤。	Figure 7: I also employ hydroscopy to elevate the folds and inspect the tumor contents within the clefts.
在术中，术者应该保持耐心，通过屏气和从腰大池置管注射空气的方法促使肿瘤下降。	The operator should remain patient to allow the tumor fragments to descend intraoperatively via the use of the Valsalva maneuver and intrathecal air injections through the lumbar drain.
“4手”技术特别有用。	I find the “four-hand” technique especially useful here.
在笔者用吸引器和另一个钝性环形刮匙切除肿瘤和在这些褶皱里操作的时候，耳鼻喉科同事在笔者操作的通道里，用一个有角度的环形刮匙抵着小棉片把鞍隔撑开。	My ENT colleague uses an angled ring curette over a small piece of cottonoid patty to hold the patulous diaphragm away from my operative corridor while I use the suction device and another blunt ring curette to remove tumor and work around the planes of these folds.
由于有4件器械，很容易出现“刀剑”效应（Swording），此时可以使用30°内窥镜，这样内镜头部可以离开手术操作空间。	The use of the 30-degree endoscope is necessary to move the head of the endoscope out of the working space of these instruments since the presence of these four instruments can easily lead to the “swording” effect.
图8. 展示“4手”技术。	Figure 8: The “four-hand” technique is shown.
耳鼻喉科同事从一侧鼻腔放内镜和牵拉用的的环形刮匙（在棉片上），神经外科医生从另一个鼻腔放吸引器和环形刮匙。	The ENT colleague places the endoscope and the retracting ring curette (over the cottonoid patty) in one nostril while the neurosurgeon places a suction device and ring curette in the other nares.
图9. 肿瘤全切除后，鞍隔失去支撑，从术腔中疝出来。	Figure 9: Following gross total resection of the tumor, the diaphragmatic folds are released and the diaphragm freely herniates through the resection cavity.
如果肿瘤侵袭鞍隔进入第三脑室，鞍隔的缺损可显著扩大，有利于更充分切除肿瘤。	If the tumor erodes through the diaphragm and into the third ventricle, the diaphragmatic defect can be expanded sharply, allowing for more radical tumor resection.
任何侵入三脑室或包裹视路的肿瘤都应该在直视下切除。	Any tumor that involves the third ventricle or surrounds the optic apparatus should be dissected under direct visualization.
鞍隔缺损一般不大，用脂肪团修补。	The diaphragmatic defect is usually not large and repairable with fat globules.
暴露鞍上结构的大的鞍隔缺损，需要“垫片密封”技术和鼻中隔粘膜来重建。	However, large defects that expose the suprasellar contents require the “gasket-seal” technique and a nasoseptal flap for their reconstruction.
笔者特别注意在鞍隔撕裂处放置并支撑脂肪团（用Surgicel包裹）。	I pay special attention to place and buttress the fat globules (wrapped in Surgicel) in the area where the diaphragmatic tear is present.
不建议过于积极的在鞍内填塞脂肪，这样会导致视路受压。	Aggressive indiscriminate filling of the sella with fat is not advised and may lead to optic apparatus compression.
由于巨大垂体腺瘤的鞍隔被充分撑开，应该在填塞脂肪前准确找到漏口。	As the diaphragm in giant tumors is quite patulous, the exact point of the leak should be recognized before the fat globules are placed.
Medpor (Porex,Newnan, GA)有助于在鞍底形成坚实的支撑，确保脂肪团在位。	Medpor (Porex, Newnan, GA) is helpful to create a solid barrier at the sellar floor and keep the fat in place.
最后使用硬膜密封产品封闭鼻中隔粘膜瓣。	A dura sealant product is then used to seal the nasoseptal flap into place.
其他入路操作技巧	OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
旁中央经蝶窦入路	Paramedian Transsphenoidal Approach
这种入路用于Knosp分级1-3级的肿瘤。	This approach is useful for Knosp Grade 1-3 tumors.
入路和关闭与经典的或传统的垂体腺瘤非常相似。	The approach and closure are essentially similar to those for classic or traditional pituitary adenomas.
扩大经鞍结节和经蝶骨平台的内镜入路有利于暴露和切除延伸到鞍上池的肿瘤。	The extended endoscopic transtuberculum and transplanum routes facilitate exposure and resection of tumors extending into the suprasellar cisterns.
电凝并横断上部海绵间窦对于暴露延伸到鞍上池前界的肿瘤非常重要。	Coagulation and transection of the superior intercavernous sinus is important to expose tumors extending into the anterior suprasellar cisterns.
肿瘤切除从鞍内部分开始。	Tumor resection begins with resection of the intrasellar portion of the mass.
直视下锐性扩大由肿瘤造成的鞍隔缺损到达鞍上，分离切除视交叉和大脑前动脉处的肿瘤。	The diaphragmatic defect caused by the tumor is then expanded via sharp dissection under direct vision to reach the suprasellar mass and dissect it from the optic chiasm and the anterior cerebral arteries.
显露和切除肿瘤的过程中，可以使用微型多普勒定位颈内动脉。	The carotid arteries are mapped appropriately using a microDoppler device during the approach and intermittently during tumor resection.
神经导航是在切除肿瘤时，时刻提供信息反馈的另一种方法。	Neuronavigation provides another source of frequent feedback during tumor manipulation.
静脉出血通常可用FloSeal（Baxter，Deerfield，IL）填塞，以小棉片适当压迫控制出血。	Venous bleeding can usually be readily controlled with FloSeal (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) packing followed by gentle tamponade using a small piece of cottonoid patty.
对颈内动脉不应有侵袭性操作，以最小化血管破裂的风险。	The carotid arteries should not be aggressively manipulated to minimize their risk of vascular dissection.
经翼颚窝入路	Transpterygoid Approach
扩大经内镜入路对于切除延伸到海绵窦外侧和前下侧的肿瘤非常有用（Knosp 4级）。	This extended endoscopic approach is useful in resection of adenomas involving the lateral or anteroinferior compartments of the cavernous sinus (Knosp Grade 4).
为了充分暴露肿瘤，可切除蝶筛窦。	A complete sphinoethmoidectomy is necessary for adequate exposure.
术前和术中鉴别气化的侧方蝶骨隐窝对于避免术后脑脊液漏是非常重要的。	Pre- and intraoperative identification of pneumatized lateral sphenoid recesses are paramount to avoid surprise postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leaks.
小心的去除视神经颈内动脉隐窝、内侧斜坡旁的颈内动脉和眶顶外侧之间的骨质，暴露前、外侧海绵窦间隔。	Careful bone removal between the opticocarotid recess, the paraclival carotid artery medially and the orbital apex laterally is required to expose the anterior and lateral cavernous sinus compartments.
蝶窦底的翼管是一个非常有用的识别岩段和斜坡旁段颈内动脉转折的标志。	The Vidian canal at the base of the sphenoid sinus is a useful landmark that identifies the transition from the petrous to the paraclival segments of the carotid artery.
肿瘤切除的方法与中线经鼻蝶入路相同，如果肿瘤局限于海绵窦的外侧，则需要分离在颈内动脉外侧切开的硬膜。	Tumor resection is achieved in the same way as the midline transsphenoidal approach, except that when the tumor is confined to the lateral part of the cavernous sinus, a separate dural opening lateral to the carotid artery is often needed.
如前所述，在微型多普勒定位的引导下剪开颈内动脉外侧硬膜。	As stated before, the dural incision lateral to the carotid artery is guided by microDoppler mapping.
小心地一点一点的切除肿瘤，避免损伤海绵窦内的颈内动脉和外展神经。	Careful piecemeal tumor resection avoids injury of the carotid artery and abducens nerve, both within the cavernous sinus.
三叉神经和动眼神经被包裹在静脉窦的外侧壁，如果没有被肿瘤包裹或推挤移位，是相对受到保护的。	The trigeminal nerve and oculomotor nerves are encased in the lateral wall of the venous sinus and are therefore relatively protected if not encased or displaced by the tumor.
术中单极刺激（2mA）可以识别外展和动眼神经。	Intraoperative monopolar stimulation (~2 mA) can identify the abducens and oculomotor nerves during resection.
不要把包裹海绵窦段颈内动脉的交感神经和海绵窦内的韧带误认为是外展神经。	The sympathetic nerves encasing the cavernous carotid artery and intracavernous ligaments should not be mistaken for the abducens nerve.
刺激定位区分这些神经和其他外形类似神经的分隔小梁/韧带。	Stimulation mapping differentiates these nerves and other trabecular septations/ligaments that can mimic the appearance of the nerves.
重建通常需要鼻中隔粘膜瓣。	Reconstruction typically demands a nasoseptal flap.
海绵窦内肿瘤的经颅入路包含了改良的Dolenc颅底入路。	The transcranial approach to intracavernous tumors involves the use of modified Dolenc skull base approaches.
请阅读《三叉神经鞘瘤》章节了解更多细节。	Please see the Trigeminal Schwannoma chapter for more details.
简而言之，联合硬膜下/硬膜外经海绵窦入路包含翼点开颅、硬膜外前床突切除、部分眶切除、视神经减压和经V1和V2之间从硬膜下进入海绵窦。	Briefly, the combined intradural/extradural transcavernous approach involves a pterional craniotomy and extradural anterior clinoidectomy, partial orbitotomy, optic canal decompression, and intradural entry into the cavernous sinus via the space between V1 and V2.
其他个人思考	Other Personal Reflections
硬膜内垂体移位是没有必要的，应该避免。	Intradural pituitary transposition is unnecessary and should be avoided.
这种形式的移位会牺牲腺体的静脉，是不能容忍的，通常会导致全垂体功能低下。	This form of transposition leads to venous sacrifice of the gland; this sacrifice is not tolerated and usually leads to panhypopituitarism.
推荐保守切除颈内动脉外侧肿瘤的策略，辅助放射治疗或许能让残留肿瘤生长缓慢。	A conservative resection strategy is recommended for tumors located lateral to the carotid artery. Adjuvant radiation therapy may be warranted for residual tumors that show interval growth on serial scans.
扩大经鼻内镜入路在一些特定情况下不如传统经颅入路，譬如：	There are specific instances when the extended endonasal endoscopic approach may be inferior to the traditional transcranial approaches. These include but are not limited to the following:
活动性鼻窦感染急性失代偿期；	active sinonasal infections in an acutely decompensating patient,
颈内动脉延长扩张症（“接吻”颈内动脉），经蝶入路时困难或不安全；（接吻颈内动脉是指双侧颈内动脉扩张迂曲，甚至可在中线发生接触。译者注）	dolichoectatic carotid arteries (“kissing” carotids), making removal through the transsphenoidal approach cumbersome or unsafe,
曾尝试经鼻手术失败的纤维化、富血供的肿瘤；	fibrous and highly vascular tumors that have failed prior endonasal resection attempts, and
蝶鞍较小而鞍上肿瘤较大；	large suprasellar tumors that reside above an atrophic sella.
请参阅《垂体腺瘤的诊断和手术注意事项》章节。	Please refer to the chapter on Pituitary Adenoma: Diagnosis and Operative Considerations.
应该在术前仔细计划手术目标，决定海绵窦内肿瘤的切除程度；	The goals of surgery, which should be carefully planned preoperatively, partly dictate the extent of tumor resection within the cavernous sinus.
建议保守的切除海绵窦外侧的肿瘤；	Conservative resection of tumors within the lateral part of the cavernous sinus is recommended.
扩大内镜入路提供了全景手术视野和操作空间，经颅切除巨大垂体腺瘤的应用已十分有限。	Given the panoramic visualization and resectability capabilities provided by the extended endoscopic approaches, there is limited role for transcranial approaches during surgery for giant pituitary adenomas.
